---
title: "Archaeobotanical Analysis and Interpretations of Enslaved Virginian Plant Use at Rich Neck Plantation (44WB52)"
creator: "Stephen A. Mrozowski, Maria Franklin, and Leith Hunt"
date: "2008"
format: "Journal Article"
subject: "Archaeobotanical analysis of plant use by enslaved people at Rich Neck Plantation"
identifier: "25470524"
source: "American Antiquity, 73(4), 699-728"
topics: "archaeobotany, slavery, Virginia, Rich Neck Plantation, plant use, colonial archaeology, foodways, ethnobotany"
type: "book extract"
extract_date: "2025-04-22"
---

Archaeobotanical Analysis and Interpretations of Enslaved Virginian Plant Use at Rich 
Neck Plantation (44WB52)

Author(s): Stephen A. Mrozowski, Maria Franklin and Leslie Hunt 

Source: American Antiquity, Oct., 2008, Vol. 73, No. 4 (Oct., 2008), pp. 699-728  

Published by: Cambridge University Press 

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/25470524

REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/25470524?seq=1&cid=pdf-
reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide 
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and 
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Cambridge University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access 
to American Antiquity

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 
(cid:0)
 REPORTS

 ARCHAEOBOTANICAL ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATIONS OF
 ENSLAVED VIRGINIAN PLANT USE AT RICH NECK PLANTATION
 (44WB52)

 Stephen A. Mrozowski, Maria Franklin, and Leslie Hunt

 Archaeobotanical analysis remains one of the least-utilized strategies for investigating the lifeways of African diasporic

 peoples despite the fact that the field of African diaspora archaeology has grown exponentially over the last 30 years. We

 consider the botanical remains from the Rich Neck Slave Quarter site as constituting a significant line of evidence for illu

 minating the nature of plant use among enslaved Afro-Virginians. As a result of the ambitious flotation program undertaken

 during the excavation of the Rich Neck site, the botanical assemblage provides evidence allowing for interpretations of the

 role of plants in enslaved subsistence and potential medicinal practices. Our research illustrates that Afro-Virginians actively

 participated in the creation of cultural practices related to plant use, and strategically shifted their production activities in

 response to both internal and external factors that influenced their lives within the context of plantation slavery.

 El andlisis arqueobotdnico continua siendo una de las estrategias menos utilizadas para investigar la vida de los pueblos
 africanos en diaspora a pesar del hecho de que el estudio de la arqueologia de la diaspora africana ha crecido exponencial
 mente durante los ultimos treinta anos. Consideramos que los restos botdnicos del sitio "Rich Neck Slave Quarter" consti

 tuyen una linea de evidencia significativapara iluminar el uso deplantaspor "afro-virginians" esclavizados. De los resultados

 del ambicioso programa de muestreo flotacion utilizado durante de la excavacion del sitio "Rich Neck", la coleccion botdnica
 provee evidencia quepermite interpretaciones delpapel de lasplantas en la subsistencia de los esclavos y de potenciales prdc
 ticas medicinales. Nuestra investigacion ilustra que los "afro-virginians" participaron activamente en la creacion deprdcti
 cas culturales relacionadas con el uso de plantas, y cambiaron estrategicamente sus actividades productivas en respuesta a

 factores intemos y externos que influenciaron sus vidas dentro del contexto de la esclavitud en la plantacion.

 For nearly three decades, the Colonial
 Williamsburg Foundation has made a con
 certed effort to expand its scholarly and inter
 pretive focus to include the free and enslaved
 Afro-Virginians who played an essential role in the

 lish colonial settlements that constituted what was

 known as Middle Plantation, the seventeenth

 century community that preceded Williamsburg
 (Muraca 1993). During the early 1990s, Colonial
 Williamsburg archaeologists uncovered the remains

 cultural, social, and economic development of Vir
 ginia's colonial capital of Williamsburg (Figure 1)

 during the eighteenth century. Part of this effort has

 involved the archaeological investigations of sites
 inhabited by enslaved Africans and blacks. One
 such site is the eighteenth-century slave quarter
 associated with the Rich Neck plantation (site
 44WB52; Agbe-Davies 1999; Franklin 2004;
 McFaden et al. 1999; Muraca et al. 2003). Located

 just over 3 km south of Williamsburg's historic dis

 of a large manor house and ancillary structures asso

 ciated with the seventeenth-century occupation of
 the site (Figure 3). In 1993, Phase I and II testing
 of areas west of the seventeenth-century homestead
 led to the discovery of an eighteenth-century
 dwelling, designated Structure 1 (see Figure 3),
 once occupied by enslaved blacks. The remains of
 an additional dwelling (Structure 2; see Figure 3)
 were located the following year. Together, Struc
 tures 1 and 2 and their related features form the site

 trict, Rich Neck (Figure 2) was one of the early Eng

 component known as the Rich Neck Slave Quarter.

 Stephen A. Mrozowski and Leslie Hunt Andrew Fiske Memorial Center for Archaeological Research, Department of
 Anthropology, University of Massachusetts, Boston, MA, 02125
 Maria Franklin Department of Anthropology, 1 University Station, C3200, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712

 American Antiquity 73(4), 2008, pp. 699-728
 Copyright ?2008 by the Society for American Archaeology

 699

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 700 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 Figure 1. Williamsburg, Virginia.

 Research Goals

 In this paper, we present the results of the macro

 botanical analysis that was carried out in conjunc
 tion with the excavation of features associated with

 Structure 1. There were two major goals guiding
 the botanical analysis. Given the limited but grow

 ing number of archaeobotanical assemblages from
 African-American sites in North America (Gard
 ner 1983; McKnight 2000, 2003; Raymer 1996,
 2003; Rock and Newsom 1987), we sought to max
 imize our returns by undertaking a program of
 botanical analysis that in almost every case involved
 the flotation of entire context matrices. This

 approach contrasted with commonly employed
 sampling protocols that seldom involve the flota
 tion of complete contexts and often focus on rich

 contexts such as privies and/or trash pits (e.g.,
 Lennstrom and Hastorf 1995). The primary purpose
 behind this program was to recover as rich an

 assemblage as possible of the plants used by the
 site's inhabitants. The second goal, developing a

 more comprehensive knowledge of African
 American plant use, was by far the most central.

 Interpretive efforts focused on the notion of "well
 being" in developing a framework for assessing
 not only household economy, but also the possible
 use of plants for more than purely caloric needs.

 Efforts were also made to investigate plant use over

 time in order to gain a clearer understanding of the

 demographics of the slave quarter at the household

 level. Since households are dynamic and transform
 as members age, leave, or enter the group, a tem

 poral analysis of the exploitation of plants might
 reveal changes in the household life cycle that led

 to shifts in household production strategies. Finally,
 we compared the archaeobotanical results from
 Rich Neck with other African-American habita

 tion sites in Virginia in order to arrive at a more

 comprehensive portrait of the enslaved household
 economy.

 Plant Use and Notions of Well-Being

 Various labels have been assigned to the economic

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 701

 ^^^ ^ Distance from site 44WB52 x \\ ^^ (f % ^J ' \J) // jg
 ^ ? ^ to Williamsburg historic x^v J) \ % // j
 ^\. area :3.2 km. >nn\>-\ \ % f[ I

 Key: -^==== - ^1

 ^) 19th-century site component

 ^ 17th- and 18th-century site components

 Figure 2. Location of the Rich Neck Plantation site (44WB52), Williamsburg.

 use of plants by human populations. Subsistence
 and diet are two of the most commonly used terms

 eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (Mrozowski
 1991, 1999, 2006). Flowers seldom contribute to

 by both prehistorians and historical archaeologists
 (e.g., Deagan 1996; Pearsall 1989; Reitz and Scarry
 1985; Scarry and Reitz 1990; Scott 1996). Plants

 provide more than just sustenance; they can be used
 for medicinal or recreational purposes (Mrozowski
 1983; Wilkie 1996), or as ornamentals in land
 scapes that hold symbolic importance for those
 who construct them (Heath 2001; Heath and Ben
 nett 2000; Mrozowski 1987, 1991, 1999, 2006;
 Shackel 1996). In this sense the notion of well
 being is designed to broaden the interpretive pos
 sibilities of archaeobotanical data beyond the
 essential economic roles plants play in human soci
 ety. For example, ornamental plants and grasses
 served as expressions of class identity during the

 diet (although there are exceptions) but add color
 or pleasant fragrances to a domestic environment
 (e.g., Heath and Bennett 2000; Raymer 2003:38).
 Jimson weed (Datura stramonium) provides an
 example of a plant that served multiple purposes.
 To start, Datura is one of several plants in its fam
 ily that readily colonizes freshly or continuously
 disturbed ground, the kind commonly found in

 association with human settlement. Despite its toxic
 properties, the seeds of the plant have also been
 found in archaeological contexts that suggest their
 consumption (Mrozowski 1983, 2006; Raymer
 2003). During the nineteenth century, jimson weed
 leaves were smoked for medicinal purposes. They
 were particularly soothing for individuals with

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 702 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 I i 1

 Rich Neck Slave Quarter, j ; 1 S

 18th century j ' i |
 I i ! I

 t Refuse Midden j \ I \

 r 1 ? i j >v I Rich Neck Plantation, 17th century
 ? *5 I ^^^^^^

 &7 | % \ & i?( StructureH ^^^^^A

 /S / 7 I | P | 1^/V'^^ ^^^?Watering
 Structure 1 ^O^ 0 I \ \ \ Jx// *\ I?1 ^^m Hole
 ^^-^ / I 'oft , /S^r
 I m\ ^ '* n?^Z/^l Structure A
 Structure 2 WT \ \ \J__#"^***J

 / > I \ ?f I JSy^m^J Structure B m 5>
 w \ >** +< y ZJF77 //

 Structure D \ J \%# Structures ^"^^^C,/ f <?
 \ \ f^i y Ey,/F > ""*?- f

 i "M7h *' //

 1 i i i/ U Midden --:>:;""

 VGrid j 1 \ l' Structure G //'

 0 45 Ft. | |

 0 ~ 15m I !; ; I
 I ' 'I

 Figure 3. The Rich Neck Plantation site (44WB52).

 bronchial conditions. Mixed with wine or other

 Native American groups, the Iroquois perceived
 food as part of a larger cultural system that linked

 them to their greater economic and spiritual world.

 alcoholic beverages, jimson weed seeds served to
 deaden the pain of wounds, or could be consumed
 for recreational purposes (Mrozowski 1983).

 Plants also served spiritual purposes in Native

 American, African American, and British Ameri

 can societies throughout colonial America. Pounds
 (1994) provides numerous examples of the man
 ner in which medieval traditions of plant use
 remained prominent well into the eighteenth cen
 tury. The Iroquois never distinguished between
 food and medicine (Parker 1975). Like many other

 Similarly, the diversity of cultural traditions brought
 by Africans to the New World spawned a variety
 of ways in which plants served nutritional, medic
 inal, symbolic, and "religious-magical," or ritual,
 purposes (Edwards-Ingram 2001; Franklin 2001;
 Grime 1979; Groover and Baumann 1996; Leone
 et al. 2001; Wilkie 1996, 2000:166-197, 2003;
 Yentsch 1994). The WPA ex-slave narratives pro
 vide numerous examples of African-American

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 703

 plant use, as interviewees often commented on both
 foodways and the use of plants in folk medicine
 (e.g., Perdue et al. 1992; Work Projects Adminis
 tration [WPA] 1994; Yetman 1970).

 The difficulty that we faced with our analysis of
 the Rich Neck botanical assemblage was whether
 it was possible to distinguish among the different
 ways that the site's inhabitants may have used
 plants. Our choice of well-being as an interpretive
 concept stemmed in large measure from the sig

 nificance it possesses for indigenous peoples today.
 In contemporary contexts well-being is described

 gence of cultural traditions in the New World born

 of colonization and slavery (e.g., Braithwaite 1971;

 Drummond 1980; Mintz and Price 1992). Although
 the process of creolization is variously defined, its

 proponents generally agree that active participation

 in the creation of new cultural forms and practices

 resulting from social interaction is a major hallmark
 of creolization theory (Gundaker 1998; Hannerz
 1996). Drawing from a range of sources, African

 Americans within the plantation context reconfig
 ured and transformed their cultural and social insti

 tutions in ways that simultaneously articulated with,

 as a state of mind that can help in coping with desta
 bilizing factors such as violence in the home,
 racism, and economic deprivation (Kowal et al.
 2007). The term actually employed by the indige
 nous peoples of Australia and the Torres Strait is
 "Social and Emotional Well-Being" or SWEB
 (Kowal et al. 2007), which is consistent with sen

 and diverged from, African, European, and Native
 American cultures. The character of the interaction

 between the enslaved community at Rich Neck and

 the broader Tidewater Virginia society is therefore
 an integral aspect of our research on the nature of

 plant use at Rich Neck. Thus, evaluating the species
 present and the ratio of wild to domestic plants

 timents expressed by indigenous peoples in New
 Zealand and North America concerning the need
 for culturally specific measures of health (Beals et
 al. 2003; Durie 1999). In our own research we asked

 over time are pivotal for addressing the question of
 how enslaved Virginians achieved well-being by
 developing a foodways system and a medicinal tra

 dition that incorporated elements of African, Euro

 whether there were remains of plants that might
 have had a positive effect on the social and emo

 tional health of the Rich Neck population. As such
 we see well-being as complementing diet. We
 believe the comparison of Rich Neck's enslaved
 Africans with the indigenous peoples of Australia,

 New Zealand, and North America to be valid given

 that all of these groups have experienced long-term

 discrimination, and economic and biological depri
 vation as a direct result of colonialism. We believe

 the enslaved Afro-Virginians experienced compa
 rable if not more difficult conditions than those

 confronting the indigenous peoples of today.
 Despite some limited success, this aspect of our
 focus on well-being served better as a point of
 departure for the comparative analysis of assem
 blages from similar sites in the region.

 The interpretation of botanical remains from

 Rich Neck was also influenced by recent scholar
 ship on creolization as a theoretical framework for
 examining the creation and transformation of

 African diasporic cultures (Burton 1997; Dawdy
 2000; Ferguson 1992; Franklin 1997; Joyner 1984;

 Trouillot 1992). The appeal of creolization theory
 among historical archaeologists as a means to inves

 tigate Creole cultures stems partly from its use by

 other scholars since the 1970s researching the emer

 pean, and Native American practices of plant use.

 In forging new identities under oppressive condi
 tions, among the challenges enslaved Virginians
 faced in procuring wild plants was heightened
 social control by slaveowners intent on restricting
 their autonomy, including illicit treks beyond the
 plantation. For newly arrived Africans, another
 challenge would have been to become familiar with

 a completely different environment, and to develop
 knowledge of foreign natural resources.

 We begin with a brief historical context of the

 site, a summary of the excavation results, and a por

 trait of Rich Neck's household organization based

 upon primary documents and the scholarship on
 enslaved social structures. This is followed by a dis

 cussion of the sampling program employed at Rich
 Neck. Finally, we propose an interpretation of the

 use of plants by Rich Neck's inhabitants largely
 through the lens of well-being, which includes both
 a consideration of dietary and medicinal uses. Our

 interpretation includes a consideration of plant use
 over time and what this potentially reveals with
 regard to household demographics and the nature
 of enslaved life at Rich Neck. We conclude with a

 comparative analysis of botanical assemblages
 from slave-related sites in Virginia as a step toward
 defining broader patterns of enslaved household

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 704 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 consumption and production practices with regard
 to plant use.

 The Rich Neck Slave Quarter

 In 1635, a wealthy merchant and land speculator
 by the name of George Menefie purchased a 1,200
 acre tract of land referred to as "Rich Neck," about

 8 km from what was then the seat of the English
 colonial government at Jamestown (McFaden et al.

 1999). Over the next 30 years, Rich Neck was sold

 several times before Thomas Ludwell purchased
 the property in 1665. Philip Ludwell, his brother,
 inherited the property upon Thomas' death.
 Although the Ludwells resided at Rich Neck dur

 ing the seventeenth century (in Structure A, shown

 in Figure 3), the family moved to nearby Green
 spring plantation sometime between 1704 and
 1706. Rich Neck would thereafter serve as a satel

 lite, or outlying, plantation with a resident com
 munity of enslaved families who worked mainly
 as field hands.

 The Ludwells were one of the most prosperous

 and politically connected families in colonial Vir
 ginia (Shepperson 1942). During the time that
 Structure 1 was occupied, Philip Ludwell Ill's
 estate included nine working plantations and 235
 enslaved blacks and Africans (Virginia Magazine
 of History and Biography [VMHB] 1913). Rich
 Neck plantation alone consisted of 3,865 acres.
 Upon his death in 1767, the estate was divided
 between his two surviving daughters. Lucy Lud
 well and her husband John Paradise thereafter

 owned most of Rich Neck; sister Hannah Philippa
 received 1,000 wooded acres of the property. Yet

 during the time that Structure 1 was occupied, Lud

 well III resided in England, as did Lucy and John
 afterwards (Shepperson 1942). A plantation man
 ager was left in charge of Rich Neck and the other
 Ludwell plantations, and the enslaved field hands

 on outlying quarters were probably under the super
 vision of white overseers. Various Ludwell descen

 Franklin 1997, 2004; see Figure 3), and a
 nineteenth-century slave dwelling (Samford 1991;
 see Figure 2). The dwelling site, which is the sub
 ject of this article, Structure 1, consisted of the

 remains of a mortared brick, H-shaped chimney
 foundation and associated hearth fill and builder's

 trench, a robber's trench (evidence of brick sal

 vaged from the chimney following abandonment),

 and 15 subfloor pits distributed on both sides of the

 hearth (Figure 4; Table 1). The subfloor pits func
 tioned mainly as storage space for foodstuffs and

 personal belongings. Due to the common practice

 of storing root crops in these belowground pits they
 are referred to as root cellars (Doepkens 1991:112,
 116-117; Edwards-Ingram 1999:158-159; Kelso
 1984:117; Linebaugh 1994:11; Linebaugh and
 Jones 1991; Mouer 1991; Samford 1996:89-95).
 Dwelling sites inhabited by enslaved Virginians
 during the colonial era often possess multiple root
 cellars (Fesler 2004a; Heath 1999:35-37; Kelso
 1984; Samford 1996,1999). Where dirt floors were

 present within houses, as was the case at Rich Neck,

 these features are commonly found cross cutting
 one another. This pattern of overlapping, subsur
 face pits is the telltale evidence of the construction,

 use, and filling of defunct cellars with refuse, and
 the subsequent act of digging new ones over old
 ones over time. Household members used this strat

 egy in order to maximize limited floor space, and
 to maintain root cellars near the hearth in order to

 keep stored foodstuffs from freezing during the
 winter.

 The absence of postholes and builder's trenches
 suggested that Structure 1 was either a framed
 house with ground-laid sills, or a log cabin. The
 dwelling was thus a wooden, two-room house, also
 known as a duplex or double-pen cabin (Herman
 1984:267; Vlach 1993:158-160), with a central
 chimney and a dirt floor. A wall divided the struc
 ture into two separate rooms, designated Resi
 dences A and B (Figure 4), with separate entryways.

 The size of the house can only be roughly estimated

 dants owned Rich Neck plantation until it was
 finally sold out of the family in 1814 (Shepperson
 1942).

 as at least 6-m wide by 11-m in length based upon
 the locations and boundaries of the subfloor pits.
 This house form was most often associated with

 The Rich Neck site as a whole encompasses the

 extensive remains of a seventeenth-century plan
 tation complex (McFaden et al. 1999; Muraca et
 al. 2003), an eighteenth-century slave quarter rep
 resented by Structures 1 and 2 (Agbe-Davies 1999;

 enslaved field hands during the eighteenth century
 (e.g., Kelso 1984:28-29, 1997:66-67; Vlach
 1993:158-160).

 Archaeologists also excavated 14 miscellaneous
 natural and cultural features in conjunction with

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 705

 tdence A

 0 1 2 3m

 Figure 4. Plan of Structure 1 features, Rich Neck Slave Quarter.

 Structure 1 remains. These included two animal

 burrows that intruded subfloor pits, and eight

 unidentified features. Four potential postholes were
 subsequently identified as tree holes (Figure 4;
 Table 1). A refuse midden was identified just west
 of Structure 1 (Figure 3) through spatial analysis
 of artifact densities and ceramic crossmending. As
 was the case with the vast majority of rural Tide
 water sites dating from the colonial period, Rich
 Neck was reclaimed for agriculture. Thus, exten
 sive plowing of the site disturbed features to
 approximately 30 cm below grade, and destroyed
 any potential ephemeral features such as staked
 fencing.

 The analyses of ceramics and coins helped to
 establish the occupation span of Structure 1 as circa
 1740-1770s. The relatively modest ceramic assem
 blage of 1,612 sherds and 128 vessels consisted
 mostly of creamwares (17.6 percent), tin-glazed
 earthenwares (19.8 percent, including delftwares),

 and white salt-glazed stonewares (15.2 percent), all
 of which are typical for mid-eighteenth-century
 Chesapeake sites. No pearlwares were present in
 feature contexts. Their absence from within sealed

 contexts was significant in dating the site since the
 TPQ (terminus post quern) for pearlware is 1775
 (Miller 1991:8; Seidel 1991). Thus, the ceramic
 assemblage suggested an occupation span dating

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 706 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 Table 1. List of Features, Sample Volumes and Specimen Counts, Rich Neck Slave Quarter.

 Feature or Sample Volume N

 Context No._Description_(liters)_Specimens_%_

 5 Sub-floor pit 1580 347 49.6
 21 Sub-floor pit 900 120 17.1
 10 Sub-floor pit 630 62 8.9
 15 Sub-floor pit 387 21 3.0
 16 Sub-floor pit 315 1 .1

 6a Sub-floor pit 265 77 11.0
 18 Sub-floor pit 255 24 3.4
 17 Sub-floor pit 165 23 3.3
 7 Sub-floor pit 155 20 2.9
 8 Sub-floor pit 105 2 .3
 14 Sub-floor pit 105 1 .1

 12, 68AL-124 Hearth fill 70

 20 Sub-floor pit 60

 lla Sub-floor pit 60

 19 Sub-floor pit 50
 24 Robber's trench 40 1 .1
 68AL-174 and-175 Animal burrow 22 1 .1

 23 Builder's trench 12

 9 Sub-floor pit 10
 68AL-14 Unid. feature 9

 68AL-152 Unid. feature 7
 68AL-177 Animal burrow 7
 68AL-107 Tree hole 5
 68AL-118 Unid. feature 5

 68AL-16 Unid. feature 3
 68AL-40 Unid. feature 1

 12, 68AL-125,-197 Burnt subsoil
 68AL-150 Tree hole
 68AL-154 Tree hole
 68AL-1256 Tree hole

 68AL-74 Unid. feature

 68AL-115 Unid. feature
 68AL-156 Unid. feature

 Note: The numbers preceded by "68AL" denote context numbers (miscellaneous features were not assigned feature numbers).
 aThis feature was partially excavated during Phase II testing of the site, allowing only a 50-percent sample to be collected
 for analysis during Phase III excavations.

 Totals_5223_700_1000_

 mostly to the third quarter of the eighteenth cen
 tury and ceramic seriation produced a mean date
 of 1753.49 (Franklin 2004:87). Additional evidence

 household level of analysis. This goal was part of
 a broader agenda to comprehend enslaved house
 hold function and to discern how such households,

 helped to refine the occupation span. The artifact
 TPQ indicated site abandonment after 1773, the

 as dynamic social units, shifted in organization over
 time (Franklin 2004). Transitions in plant exploita

 year stamped on Virginia halfpennies recovered
 from root cellar contexts. The archaeological evi

 tion might be linked to the household life cycle
 where death, birth, and marriage patterns influ

 dence, therefore, suggested that the dwelling was

 enced the growth or decline of a household. House

 inhabited for roughly 30 years from the early 1740s
 to the 1770s.

 hold strategies might also have shifted as members
 reached puberty and adulthood, increasing the
 demand for various resources. Moreover, with

 Rich Neck's Social Organization

 An important component of our second research

 goal entailed a consideration of plant use at the

 regard to enslaved households, the break up of fam
 ilies as a result of sale (Gutman 1976; Wilkie
 2003:70-72), the removal of members to labor on

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 707

 other plantations owned by the same planter, and
 successful escapes to free territory were also fac
 tors that affected household structure and produc
 tion. In light of our second research goal, this
 section summarizes Rich Neck's household struc

 ture and the role of enslaved households within the

 context of the slave quarter.

 As with societies elsewhere (e.g., Barile and

 Brandon 2004; Yanagisako 1979), enslaved blacks
 and Africans created families, households, and
 communities, and individuals simultaneously
 belonged to, and variously participated in, each
 (Anderson 2004; Battle 2004; Fesler 2004a; Gut
 man 1976; Malone 1992; Walsh 1997; Wilkie
 2000). Enslaved families were ubiquitous by the
 mid-eighteenth century in Virginia, particularly
 among plantations belonging to wealthy slave
 owners (Kulikoff 1986:358-365). Yet exogamy was

 a common practice among enslaved Virginians,
 where individuals chose spouses who resided on
 other plantations (Gutman 1976:131, 134-137,
 140-142; Stevenson 1996). As a consequence of
 these "abroad" marriages, enslaved women and
 their children commonly lived on one quarter while
 husbands and fathers lived on another (Sobel
 1987:163). Family break-ups through sale and
 inheritance also contributed to the widespread dis

 tribution of both immediate and extended family
 members. With each proceeding generation,
 enslaved individuals like those at Rich Neck who

 given that the reasons why and the ways in which
 people form households across space and time are
 both situational and culturally specific. We distin
 guish "household" from "family" in that kinship
 was not necessarily one of the organizing princi
 ples around which enslaved households were
 formed. Neither was co-residence, although
 enslaved householders more often than not resided

 within the same slave quarter, if not under the same
 roof. The enslaved household is defined here pro
 visionally as a social unit that worked coopera
 tively in production, distribution, and social
 reproduction activities within the domestic con
 text. Household production is defined as "human
 activity that procures or increases the value of
 resources" (Wilk and Netting 1984:6). The major
 contribution to household production among Vir
 ginia's enslaved households was the pooling of
 labor in subsistence activities, and likely in main

 taining cabins and outbuildings, fences, roads, and

 the communal spaces surrounding the quarter (Fes
 ler 2004b:216-217; Franklin 2004:141-166). Yards
 served as extensions of the house, and within these
 shared spaces household members spent their
 leisure time and socialized. The women in partic
 ular used yard areas to cooperate in chores such as

 laundering, sewing, and food preparation (Battle
 2004; Edwards 1998:268-270; Heath and Bennett
 2000; White 1999:119-125). Household distribu
 tion took the form of sharing resources (Wilk and

 belonged to wealthy planters increasingly had rel

 Netting 1984:9), including food, from time to time.

 atives living across different plantations (Kulikoff
 1986:363; Walsh 1997). One result was that
 enslaved individuals and families also formed

 wider, more inclusive social groupings that con
 tributed to the economic, social, and cultural life

 The game captured from communal hunts would
 be distributed among household members (Tuma

 2006; Young et al. 2001), or members might share
 tools and other scarce resources. Household mem

 bers also participated in social reproduction, in that

 of the slave quarter community. We identify these
 groups as households, although similar social units

 are also referred to in the literature on slavery as
 extended families, kin groups, social networks, and
 communities (Berlin 1998:131-132; Walsh
 1997:49-50; White 1999; Young et al. 2001:
 694-695).

 Scholars have variously conceptualized the
 household (Allison 1999; Beaudry 2004; Bender
 1967; Goody 1972; Hammel and Laslett 1974;
 Hendon 1996; Mrozowski 1984; Spencer-Wood
 2004; Trigg 2004; Wilk and Ashmore 1988; Wilk

 and Netting 1984; Wilk and Rathje 1982). Yet, a
 cross-cultural definition has failed to materialize

 childrearing was a shared responsibility within the
 slave quarter (Edwards-Ingram 2001:51; Steven
 son 1996:175-176, 179; Walsh 1997:144-145;
 White 1991:114-115, 1999; Wilkie 2003:65).
 Adults socialized children with regard to gender

 norms, community values, and survival strategies

 that helped them to cope with the perils and oppres

 sive forces of slavery (Wilkie 2003:68-69). They
 also gained a sense of collective identity through
 these social interactions.

 Most of what is known about the social struc

 ture of the slave quarter population at Rich Neck
 comes from information provided in a probate
 inventory taken in 1767 after the death of Phillip

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 708 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 Ludwell III, who owned Rich Neck beginning in
 1726. The inventory of the Rich Neck quarter
 records the names, sexes, and relative ages of its

 inhabitants by listing individuals in the order of

 hands and their families (Walsh 1993), or between

 15 and 30 enslaved Virginians (Kulikoff 1986:365),

 typically worked under the supervision of an over
 seer or foreman. We propose that at Rich Neck, the

 adult males, adult females, boys, and girls (VMHB
 1913). By comparing the Rich Neck inventory to

 21 individuals who lived at the quarter comprised

 a single household with members participating in

 another Ludwell estate appraisal that listed enslaved
 individuals by sex, value, occupation, and exact
 age (Lee Family Papers 1638-1867), it was possi
 ble to estimate the ages of Rich Neck's residents
 (Franklin 2004:25-28). To summarize, in 1767 21

 people lived at Rich Neck: 10 men, five women,

 three boys, and three girls. Of the adults, as many
 as five individuals?four men and one woman?

 were near or above the age of 60 years, and were

 probably too old to work full-time in the fields
 (Franklin 2004:25-28). The remaining 10 adults
 were roughly between the ages of 18 and 50 years,
 and were considered "full" hands. At least two of

 the women were of child-bearing age, and the pres
 ence of five mature men and six children suggests
 that one or two nuclear families may have lived at

 the quarter. An alternative and equally viable inter

 pretation is that the women with children were mar

 ried to spouses who lived on other plantations.

 As many as half of the 21 members of this com

 munity may have occupied Structure 1, and these

 were likely families, one to each room, given the
 common practice by slaveowners of providing sep
 arate living quarters for enslaved families (includ
 ing women in abroad marriages with children
 [Sobel 1987:111]). The varying ages, including the
 advanced age of as many as five people by 1767,
 illustrates this community's generational depth.
 Some of these elders were probably born in Africa,
 as the African slave trade to Virginia was most
 active between 1700-1740 (Berlin 1998:110-111;

 Kulikoff 1986:65; Morgan 1998). The age and sex
 distribution indicates that extended families, where

 conjugal or single-parent families shared their
 home with additional relatives or Active kin, were

 a range of household activities to varying degrees,
 and each bringing diverse expertise (knowledge
 and skills) and resources to share with other mem
 bers (Fesler 2004a; Samford 2004). The procure

 ment, preparation, distribution, and consumption
 of plants for sustenance and perhaps medicinal pur
 poses, and the attendant schooling of children in
 these strategies and practices, at least partially
 occurred at the household level of organization.
 The research on enslaved social organization, par
 ticularly for Virginia (e.g., Fesler 2004a, 2004b;
 Kulikoff 1986:358-371; Walsh 1997), underscores

 the fact that slave quarters were populated with a
 fairly heterogeneous mix of solitaires (typically
 single males, or men with families on other plan
 tations, and the elderly), and a diverse assortment
 of family arrangements including both nuclear and
 extended families (Gutman 1976; Malone 1992).
 Household formation ensured its members that a

 support network extending beyond kinship ties
 existed to alleviate domestic workloads, childrea

 ring responsibilities, and to provide for well-being
 in the form of shared food and healthcare.

 Having established the social organization
 related to plant use at Rich Neck, in what follows
 we address our two research goals. The discussion
 begins with our collection protocol and a summary

 of the plant species recovered from the site. This is

 followed by the diachronic analysis of plant use and
 what the evidence reveals about the potential rela
 tionship between the household lifecycle and
 household strategies concerning plant use at Rich
 Neck. Finally, we attempt to provide an interpre

 tation of African-American plant use from a more

 comprehensive comparative perspective as it relates

 also present (Berlin 1998:131-132; Gutman 1976;
 Kulikoff 1986:358-371; Malone 1992; Walsh

 to the concept of well-being defined earlier in our
 paper.

 1997). This may have been particularly true for the
 elders, who had lived most of their lives at Rich

 Neck and spent their last years together with their
 adult children or other relations.

 Methodology:
 Botanical Sampling and Identification

 The social organization of this slave quarter was
 consistent with the norm for outlying Tidewater

 Methods and Materials

 plantations during the eighteenth century. Ten full

 We attempted to sample the full range of archaeo

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 709

 logical contexts present at Rich Neck in order to
 avoid the pitfall of sampling bias where only pits
 or hearths are sampled (Lenstromm and Hastorf
 1995; see Table 1). Archaeologists excavated the

 in Structure l's root cellars, they generally leave
 behind no macrobotanical evidence (for a rare

 exception see McKnight 2003).

 Mrozowski and Hunt identified and quantified

 15 subfloor pits, or root cellars, of Structure 1 fol

 seeds and nutshells through comparisons with type

 lowing natural strata. In nearly every instance the
 soils comprising each context were collected and
 floated in their entirety using a Flotec flotation
 device. The three exceptions included two subfloor

 pit contexts within Features 6 and 11 partially exca
 vated during Phase II testing, and one context
 within Feature 10 discussed below. In addition, the
 fills from two animal burrows that cut into root cel

 lars, five unidentified features, a robber's trench, a
 builder's trench, and hearth fill associated with
 Structure 1 were floated (Table 1). We also sam

 pled one tree hole, initially identified as a possible

 posthole. Context volumes ranged from one to 815

 liters. The 815-liter sample was retrieved from con
 text 68AL-133, which was composed of a very
 fine, clay-like soil from within Feature 10, a root

 cellar. It was the only context within Feature 10 that

 was not entirely floated. A total of 325 liters was
 processed from context 68AL-133, while an addi
 tional 490 liters have been stored for future analy

 sis. In all, a total of 5,223 liters of soil (not including
 the 490 liters from context 68 AL-133 which remain

 to be floated) from a total of 69 contexts were

 floated and analyzed. These included soils from all

 of the 15 subfloor pits found in association with
 Structure 1, as well as those collected from the 11
 additional features. All fractions from all contexts

 were scanned using a stereoscopic microscope. At
 Rich Neck, off-site control samples were used to
 determine which modern species we could expect
 as contaminants. Although several studies have
 demonstrated that noncharred seeds recovered from

 specimens housed at the Department of Archaeo
 logical Research at Colonial Williamsburg. This
 comparative collection was drawn from several

 sources including the Herbarium of the College of
 William and Mary and historic seed collections
 from Thomas Jefferson's Monticello. In addition

 to these type specimens, several species were pur
 posely charred in order to supply information on

 changes in seed morphology that might aid in our
 identification. Each identifiable whole seed, nut

 shell, or fragment consisting of at least half of a
 seed or nutshell was counted as one unit. Given that

 the overwhelming majority of the seeds recovered
 from Rich Neck were whole seeds, we feel confi
 dent that almost all of the seeds counted from the

 site are accurately identified and form a represen

 tative assemblage of the macrobotanical material
 we recovered. Of the 700 seeds and nutshells, 698

 came from subfloor pit features. Samples from only

 two of the remaining features contained seeds: one
 each from the robber's trench (Feature 24) and an
 animal burrow (context 68AL-174). A total of 664
 seeds and nutshells were identified to some taxo

 nomic level; only 5.1 percent of this assemblage
 was unidentifiable. Being able to identify such a
 high percentage of the specimens recovered (94.9

 percent) supports what we believe is the truly rep
 resentative character of the botanical assemblage.
 Still, we realize that greatly fragmented and there
 fore unidentifiable seed bits could represent more
 friable types of charred seeds and this would skew

 the representation of taxa.

 historic sites can survive in both wet and dry con
 texts (Miller 1989; Mrozowski 1983), off-site con
 trols raised serious doubt about the contextual

 Sixty-seven of the 69 contexts (the two remain

 ing contexts were within Features 6 and 11) were

 examined in their entirety. Of the 67 contexts, 45

 integrity of the noncharred Rich Neck botanical
 remains. In this case, the modern seeds found in

 of these (67.2 percent) had fewer than one speci
 men per 10-liter sample. The other 22 contexts had

 the control sample corresponded with the over

 whelming majority of uncharred remains found in

 the archaeological contexts. Fortunately, none of
 the charred remains recovered from the archaeo

 logical contexts appeared in the control samples.
 Therefore, only charred specimens were analyzed.

 It should be noted here that although root crops such

 as yams and potatoes were more than likely stored

 a specimen density of greater than or equal to one
 specimen per 10-liter sample. Had we depended
 upon the protocol of collecting only a 10-liter sam

 ple of fill from each context, we would likely not
 have found specimens in these 45 contexts. The

 specimens we did find in these low-density con
 texts represented the same taxa as the specimens
 we recovered from the 22 high-density contexts.

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 710 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4, 2008]

 Table 2. Rich Neck Slave Quarter Botanical Assemblage.

 _Common Name_Genus or Species_Count_% Ubiquity

 Cultivated genera/species Bean Phaseolus sp. 23 3.5 12.0

 Corn Zea mays 30 4.5 15.0
 Cowpea Vignasp. 187 28.2 24.0
 Kidney bean Phaseolous vulgaris 3 .5 6.0
 Lima bean Phaseolous lunatus 1 .1 3.0
 Melon Citrullus lanatus 2 .3 6.0
 Peanut Arachis hypogaea 1 .1 3.0
 Little barley Hordeum pusillum 18 2.7 9.0
 Rye Secale cereale 4 .6 6.0
 Squash Cucurbita pepo 1 .1 3.0
 Wheat Triticum aestivum 6 .9 12.0

 Wild genera/species Acorn Que reus sp. 11 1.7 9.0

 Bedstraw Galium sp. 1 .1 3.0
 Black walnut Juglans nigra 113 17.0 24.0
 Blackberry Rubus sp. 3 .5 6.0
 Cherry Prunus sp. 6 .9 18.0
 Honey locust Gleditsia triacanthos L. 250 37.7 30.0
 Sedge Carex sp. 3 .5 3.0
 Sheep sorrel Rumex acetolsella 1 .1 3.0

 No. of identifiable specimens 664 100.0
 No. of unidentifiable specimens 36
 Total 700

 No. of cultivated species/genera 276 41.6
 No. of wild species/genera 388 58.4

 Total_664 100.0_

 Note: Plant species ubiquity was determined by the percentage of features (n = 26) in which a plant species was found.

 If, however, we had used only sampling protocol,
 by probability we might have missed many speci
 mens occurring in small numbers or singly in even
 a high-density context. Some of these potentially
 missed specimens represent species that were cul
 turally significant. For example, we found a small
 number of wheat grains that probably would have
 been missed through protocol sampling. Now we
 have evidence that this field crop was more than

 percent) and wild (58.4 percent) species. Most
 numerous among the cultivated plants are two
 species of legume: cowpea (Vigna sp.), and bean
 (Phaseolus sp.). The latter is present in two vari
 eties: lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus) and the kid
 ney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris). There is also one
 specimen each of squash (Cucurhita pepo) and
 peanut (Arachis hypogaea) seeds. The assemblage
 also includes Little barley (Hordeum pusillum),
 corn (Zea mays), and a smaller number of wheat
 (Triticum aestivum) and rye (Secale cereale) seeds

 likely cultivated at one time on the Rich Neck plan
 tation.

 Results of the Botanical Analysis

 The botanical assemblage from the Rich Neck
 Slave Quarter represents one of the most compre
 hensive ever collections amassed from an African

 American site in North America. Although the

 assemblage is not large, a total of 664 identifiable

 specimens from 17 genera, including 12 identified
 species, were represented (Table 2). Overall, the
 assemblage is comprised of both cultivated (41.6

 that represent crops that were most likely grown

 on Ludwell plantations, and then provisioned to the

 enslaved population. The fruits include melon (Cit
 rullus lanatus), cherry (Prunus sp.), and blackberry

 (Rubus sp.); the latter two were probably foraged.
 Other wild plants that appear to have been col
 lected on a regular basis were black walnut (Juglans
 nigra), acorns (Quercus sp.), and most predomi
 nately, honey locust (Gleditsia triacanthos).

 Given that we employed such an intensive sam
 pling program, the 664 identifiable specimens

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 711

 recovered seemed small when compared to the
 20,000 seeds recovered at King's Bay Plantation
 in Georgia (Rock and Newsom 1987). However,
 75 percent of that entire assemblage was composed

 of one species: pokeweed (Phytolacca americana),
 and these were recovered from two privy pits. The
 Rich Neck assemblage is much more comparable
 to other Southeastern sites where botanical mate

 rials were recovered from similar contexts such as

 subfloor pits and trash pits (e.g., Gardner 1983;
 Heath 2001; Raymer 1996, 2003). At present, the
 Rich Neck assemblage can be compared with four
 analogous sites from Virginia alone (see Compar
 ative Perspectives below). We proceed with the
 analysis and interpretation of the Rich Neck botan
 ical assemblage and follow with a comparative
 analysis of enslaved Virginian plant use.

 Interpretations of Plant Use

 If we look at the assemblage as a whole, we can
 make several observations concerning the use of
 plants by the site's inhabitants and the production
 strategies related to well-being they may have

 employed. First, the evidence of such common field

 described the plots of ground that enslaved people

 farmed while traveling through Virginia. He noted

 that they were permitted to cultivate "little Plats for
 potatoes or Indian pease and Cimnells [squash]"
 (Stiverson and Butler 1977:32). In 1774, Philip
 Fithian, a Virginian tutor, observed enslaved indi
 viduals working small plots "allow'd by their Mas

 ter" in which potatoes and peas were grown (quoted
 in Gibbs 1999:10). Enslaved blacks not only used

 gardens as a way to supplement their diets, they also

 engaged in the sale of agricultural produce (Heath
 2004:23; Heath and Bennett 2000:42; Walsh et al.

 1997:89). The evidence for gardening at Rich Neck

 includes the presence of several weeds commonly
 found in gardens (sedge, sheep sorrel, and bed
 straw) and the remains of squash, melon, beans, and

 cowpeas that are normally considered garden crops.
 The cowpea, which appeared in large numbers, is
 an annual of African origin that is widely culti
 vated in warm climates. Better known as black-eyed

 peas, they could be eaten fresh or boiled.

 The honey locust (Gleditsia triacanthos L.) is a

 fast-growing tree of the Caesalpiniaceae family,
 and is native to the central part (north to south) of

 crops as corn, wheat, and to a lesser degree, barley
 and rye, indicates some access to commercially
 produced crops. Ludwell's probate inventory of
 1767 (VMHB 1913) lists barrels of corn and mill

 the eastern United States. It attains heights up to
 around 40 m and the fruits are long (30-45 cm),

 twisted pods that hang on the branches throughout

 the winter (University of British Columbia 2003).

 pecks (i.e., milled grains; a "peck" is the equiva
 lent of eight dry quarts) stored along with tobacco
 at Rich Neck, and it is almost certain that these were

 part of the rations distributed on site to the enslaved

 population. Wheat and rye suggests that bread was

 part of the diet, although it is just as likely that these

 grains were prepared as gruels similar to those eaten
 by the Anglo-American population during this
 period.

 It appears that gardening was widely practiced
 among enslaved blacks. Archaeologists have relied
 on the evidence for fenced enclosures, plant
 remains, irregular soil disturbances, and soil rich

 in chemicals associated with decaying organic mat
 ter to interpret gardening activities at slave-related
 sites (Heath 1999; Heath and Bennett 2000). Doc

 umentation by travelers and slaveowners, planta
 tion records, accounts listing the purchases of
 slaves, and notations on plantation maps corrobo

 rate the archaeological evidence (Edwards-Ingram
 2001:44; Gibbs 1999; Moore 1989:74-75; West

 macott 1992:16-18). In 1732, William Hugh Grove

 It is prevalent on disturbed sites, and its range was

 probably extended by Native Americans who used
 the dried pulp of the honey locust pods as a sweet
 ener and thickener and ate the cooked seeds (Duke
 1983a). The Cherokee used honey locust pods to
 sweeten worm medicine and in an infusion for

 measles (Moerman 1998). An infusion of the bark

 was taken for whooping cough and also used as a
 bath for dyspepsia. In addition to these medicinal
 uses of honey locust, the Cherokee also included

 it in their diet. They were known to employ the seed

 pulp as a drink, and consumed the raw pods. Moer
 man (1998) notes other Native groups who used

 honey locust, including the Creeks, who prepared
 a decoction of the sprigs, thorns, and branches as

 a bath to prevent smallpox, while the pod was con
 sidered an effective antidote for children's com

 plaints (Moerman 1998). The Delaware exploited
 honey locust bark and mixed it with the bark of

 other plants for blood purification, and as a tonic
 for coughs. The Rappahannock employed an infu
 sion of the bark and roots as a cough and cold med

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 712 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4, 2008]

 icine. Similarly, the Fox used honey locust bark for

 Native Americans have made broad use of the

 colds, fevers, measles, and smallpox (Duke 1983a).
 Duke and Wain (1981, as cited in Duke 1983a)
 reported the pods to possess anodyne (bringing
 relief from discomfort), mydriatic (dilatory), and
 narcotic properties. Finally, Duke (1983a) notes
 that alcohol could be made by fermenting honey
 locust pulp, and the seeds used to produce a bev
 erage much like coffee. There are historical

 accounts of honey locust in Virginia that may illu
 minate some of the different ways the Rich Neck

 household used the plant, including as a sweetener.
 Grove noted in his Williamsburg travel diary of

 1732 that the honey locust contained "a sweet pulp

 like honey which John the Baptist lived on" (Stiver

 son and Butler 1977:37). An ex-slave by the name

 of Peter Randolph also wrote of honey locust in his
 autobiography. Randolph lived on a plantation in
 Prince George's County, Virginia, during the nine
 teenth century. He noted that persimmons and

 honey locust were brewed together in water to make

 a beverage that slaves carried in gourds to the fields:

 black walnut tree, as demonstrated by the follow

 ing examples of Cherokee, Delaware, and Rappa
 hannock uses (Moerman 1998). The Cherokee
 made an infusion of the plant to wash sores, used
 an infusion of bark for smallpox, and of leaves for
 goiter. They chewed on the bark to relieve
 toothaches and pulverized the leaves for rubbing
 onto body parts affected by ringworm. Nuts were
 used for food, both alone and mixed with other

 plant foods such as hominy and beans, and black
 walnuts could be dried for future use. The bark,

 roots, and husks made a brown dye, and the leaves
 provided a green dye. Similar to Cherokee usage,
 the Delaware employed the juice from green fruits

 for ringworm, the sap for inflammation, and a bark
 tea for removal of intestinal bile. They scattered
 leaves about living quarters to dispel fleas. The
 Rappahannock took an infusion of bark to prevent

 dysentery, while bark from the north side of the tree

 was compounded into a poultice for sufferers from
 chills. Moreover, a root bark infusion was used to

 they get a barrel and put the "simmons" into

 it, and put water there too, and something else

 that grow on trees, that they call "locusses",
 which are about ten inches long, and two
 across. They put the "locusses" and "simmons"

 into the water together, and let them stand for
 two or three days [Randolph 1969:31].

 It is likely that Rich Neck's householders used
 honey locust for a multiplicity of dietary and med
 icinal purposes, and possibly as a fuel.

 Another plant that was well represented in the
 botanical assemblage from Rich Neck was black
 walnut (Juglans nigra L.). Black walnut trees
 served as both a shade and ornamental tree, usu

 ally growing up to 33 m tall (and possibly rising to
 100 m). These trees are often unbranched for the

 first 9 m. The nuts are used in baked goods, pas

 tries, and sweets. Historically, people have used the

 plant as a folk remedy to eliminate intestinal par
 asites, to reduce lymphatic swelling, to ameliorate

 skin problems such as eczema and poison ivy, and
 to treat vaginal infections. There are numerous
 companies touting the efficacy of their products
 containing black walnut. Duke (1983b) lists her
 pes, indolent ulcers, scrofula, ague, quinsy, gan
 grene, leprosy, and wounds as being treated by
 medicaments drawn from various parts of the plant.

 "roughen the intestines" (Moerman 1998:280-281).
 The presence of honey locust seeds and black
 walnut shells in such large numbers may, in part,

 be a result of preservation as these were the most
 robust remains in the assemblage. Although we
 have previously suggested that both honey locust
 seeds and pods were consumed at Rich Neck, the
 seeds along with nutshells could have been waste
 products used as fuel. Still, their presence suggests
 to us a population that was meeting a variety of
 needs through a household economy that relied
 upon both wild and cultivated species. In addition

 to the plant domesticates noted above, Rich Neck's
 household seems to have relied upon black walnuts

 for a food source (as well as acorns). The WPA ex
 slave narratives include interviews of individuals

 who recalled collecting acorns (Yetman 1970:100)
 and black walnuts as children: "Us little tykes
 would gather black walnuts in de woods and store
 'em under de cabins to dry" (Yetman 1970:71). It

 is possible that black walnut tree bark was used for
 making medicinal teas as well.

 The combination of plants that possessed nutri
 tional value and curative properties argues for a
 household that had at their disposal the means to
 go beyond dietary concerns to meet the needs of
 the well-being of their members. We cannot con

 firm that all of the propositions for medicinal plant

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 713

 use discussed above were actually practiced at Rich

 alteration in household demographics (for exam

 Neck. There is, however, evidence that strengthens

 the likelihood of medicinal plant use that can be
 drawn from other archaeological studies (Edwards
 Ingram 2001; Wilkie 1996, 2003), as well as from
 recollections of ex-slaves documented by the Vir
 ginia Writer's Project (Perdue et al. 1992).

 Although medicinal plant use at Rich Neck is
 inconclusive, the botanical remains still allow us
 to reach two other conclusions. First, the level of

 botanical continuity between the early and later
 phases of occupation suggests a degree of house

 hold stability over time, if not growth, for over 30
 years (see Diachronic Analysis below). The stabil

 ity of social units was more the norm for enslaved
 families and households attached to large planta
 tion holdings in Virginia, as was generational depth
 (Walsh 1997). Debt was a major reason for selling
 enslaved blacks, and since these individuals

 belonged to prosperous planters their prospect of
 being sold off was lessened. Second, Rich Neck's

 household attempted to supplement and diversify
 their diet, as evidenced by the presence of wild
 species, and common garden species that would

 probably not have come from the plantation or mar

 ket. Thus, enslaved Virginians possessed some self
 autonomy and control within their system of
 foodways, and probably with medicinal practices.
 This interpretation is supported by the faunal evi
 dence from the site (Franklin 2001, 2004). We

 recovered a wide array of wild species including
 opossum, squirrel, raccoon, white-tailed deer, and
 Canadian goose. Turtles, blue crabs, oysters, clams,

 and 20 varieties offish rounded out the assemblage.

 When combined with the lead, net weights (for
 fishing), gunflints, and various-sized lead shot exca

 vated from the site, the evidence clearly indicates

 that the Rich Neck household actively participated

 in hunting, fishing, trapping, and gathering in order
 to supplement their diets.

 Diachronic Analysis of Botanical Remains

 Household production at Rich Neck largely
 involved the pooling of labor in domestic activi

 ple, an increase or decrease in membership, or chil
 dren achieving young adulthood status), although
 other factors (such as landscape changes, modifi
 cations in plantation provisions, etc.) must also be
 considered. The delineation of the depositional his

 tory of Structure 1 features was first required in

 order to interpret plant use over time. The site's
 phasing (Table 3) was determined by an analysis

 of the stratigraphic relationships of contexts within
 and between Structure 1 features, ceramic cross

 mends, and the dates derived from artifacts (ceram
 ics and coins) recovered from subfloor pits
 (Franklin 2004:141-166).

 In order to facilitate a comparison of the botan

 ical material representing the various site phases,
 the contexts from which they were recovered
 (mainly pit fill) were grouped according to their rel
 ative date of deposition (Table 3). Botanical data
 were recompiled according to this classification
 (Tables 3 and 4). Since botanical remains from

 three of the subfloor pits (Features 5, 10 and 21)
 were deposited in discrete filling episodes with dif

 ferent relative dates of deposition, the specimens
 from individual contexts within these three fea

 tures were separated and grouped in their related

 phases. Tables 3 and 4 represent only those features

 that were included in delineating the site's deposi
 tional history (thus excluding 68AL-174, an ani
 mal burrow with one honey locust seed), and that
 contained contexts with plant remains. For these
 features, the sample volumes listed in Table 3 (a
 total of 4,547 liters) include only those that con
 tained plant specimens.

 The archaeological contexts associated with
 Phase I (Feature 23, a builder's trench) contained
 no botanical material. Phase VI (post
 abandonment) is represented by one unidentifiable
 seed from the robber's trench (Feature 24). In con
 trast, contexts associated with Phases II-V con
 tained a wealth of botanical material. Since we are

 concerned here with the period associated with the
 occupation of Structure 1, Phase VI is omitted from

 this analysis.

 ties, and we include the procurement of plants as
 one example. The analysis of plant exploitation
 over time might not only reveal the kinds of pro

 duction strategies used by Rich Neck's household,
 but it may also provide evidence for the household

 The results indicate that there are pronounced
 differences between the phases (Table 4). The
 assemblage associated with the early phase of occu
 pation (Phase II) contains fewer specimens and is
 less rich. No evidence of provisioned crops (corn,

 lifecycle. Adjustments in plant use might signal an

 wheat, rye, and barley) appears in this assemblage.

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 714 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4, 2008]

 Table 3. Specimen Counts by Site Phase, Structure 1.

 Feature or Volume3

 _Phase TPQ Context No. (liters)_A^_AP_%

 Construction of Str. 1 I 1720 ? ? ? ?
 Early Occupation II 1745 5,8, 14, 17,21 580 44 4 7.0
 Middle Occupation III 1765 5, 10 1270 248 12 37.2
 Late Occupation IV 1773 5,10,18,21 1585 257 14 38.7
 Str. 1 Abandonment V 1773 6,7,15,16 1087 114 5 17.0
 Post-Abandonment VI 1773 24 25 ? 1 .1

 Note: The sub-floor pit features and robber's trench (Feature 24) represented in this table contained contexts that were both

 included in the determination of Structure l's depositional history and that included plant remains. An animal burrow

 (context 68AL-174) produced a single honey locust seed, but this feature was not included in site phasing. See Table 1 for
 a list of all of the features sampled.

 aThe sample volumes listed include only those that contained plant specimens. For the total sample volume per feature, see
 Table 1.

 Totals_4547_663_36_100.0

 bIdentified specimens.

 cUnidentified specimens.

 Garden species

 Table 4. Distribution of Plant Specimens by Site Phase, Structure 1.

 _Phase II % Phase III %_Phase IV %_Phase V %

 Bean 1 2.3 16 6.6 6 2.3 ? ?
 Cowpea 8 18.2 115 47.1 57 22.3 7 6.1

 Kidney bean ? ? 2 .8 1 .4 ? ?
 Lima bean ? ? 1 .4 ? ? ? ?
 Melon ? ? 1 .4 1 .4 ? ?
 Peanut 1 2.3 ? ? ? ? ? ?
 Squash ? ? 1 .4 ? ? ? ?

 Commercial crops

 Corn ? ? 11 4.5 15 5.9 4 3.5

 Pearl barley ? ? 13 5.3 5 2.0 ? ?
 Rye ? ? 3 1.2 1 .4 ? ?

 Wheat ? ? 2 .8 1 .4 3 2.6

 Wild species

 Acorn 8 18.2 ? ? 3 1.2 ? ?
 Black walnut 18 40.9 37 15.2 53 20.7 5 4.4
 Blackberry ? ? 2 .8 1 .4 ? ?

 Honey locust 8 18.2 38 15.6 109 42.6 94 82.5

 Cherry ? ? 2 .8 3 1.2 1 .9

 Totals by phase_44 100.0 244 100.0_256 100.0_114 100.0
 Note: Specimens representing weeds (sedge, bedstraw, and common sheep sorrel; n = 4, Phase III; n = 1, Phase IV) are
 excluded.

 In comparison with the Phase II specimens, the
 Phase III and IV assemblages are considerably
 richer with much higher specimen frequencies in

 most cases. Although corn, wheat, rye, and barley
 are present, the Rich Neck household depended
 more upon plants that they themselves produced or
 procured through gardening (peanut, melon,

 squash, bean, and cowpea) or foraging (honey
 locust, black walnut, cherry, acorn, and blackberry).
 Site inhabitants relied upon honey locust, black
 walnut, cowpeas, and corn with some regularity,
 and to a slightly lesser degree, beans and wheat.
 This observation is supported by the ubiquity mea
 sures for the site as a whole (Table 2). During the

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 715

 1oo% i-^?I

 100

 900/0 ?34-m~

 80% ~=-169-1"
 7?:/o I 136 , -|? r_,
 50% --? -- - ? -1- Wild species

 50% H ? D Garden species

 Phase II Phase III Phase IV Phase V

 Figure 5. Percentages of garden, wild, and crop specimens by site phase. Note: Sedge (n = 3), bedstraw (n = 1), and
 sheep sorrel (n = 1) are excluded.

 phase associated with occupation leading up to site
 abandonment (Phase V), the only production activ
 ity associated with plant use (represented by the
 botanical remains) that seemed to hold steady was

 in numbers. As Figure 5 illustrates, from Phases III
 V there is an inverse relationship between speci
 mens representing garden and crop domesticates
 on one hand, and wild plants on the other, sug
 gesting that foraging became the primary strategy

 the gathering of honey locust.

 The diversity and frequency of botanical
 remains by phase distribution suggest that house

 for procuring plants. Additional sources effectively
 demonstrate that enslaved blacks assumed the bur

 hold strategies related to plant production shifted
 diachronically (Figure 5). Over time, differences
 in botanical diversity argue for a broader subsis
 tence base supported by gardening and foraging
 activities which both intensified during Phases III
 and IV. By Phase V, although there are over twice
 as many specimens present than in the Phase II
 assemblage, this is due solely to the large propor
 tion of only one plant: honey locust (Table 4).

 A number of factors influenced the acquisition,
 cultivation, and consumption of plants over time.

 den of supplementing their diet on a widespread
 basis and in large part as a result of meager rations
 (Perdue et al. 1992:72, 116, 124, 244-245, 274).
 The archaeological and historical records reveal
 that enslaved Virginians responded by taking food,
 protesting their allotments, keeping gardens and
 livestock, hunting and fishing, and hiring them

 selves out to raise cash in order to buy food (Atkins
 1994; Berlin 1998:119, 136-137; Bowen 1996;
 Crader 1990; Genovese 1972:603-604; Heath
 2004:29; Kulikoff 1986:392-393; McKee 1987,
 1999; Morgan 1998:140; Perdue et al. 1992: 57,
 306, 327; Samford 2004; Walsh 1997:100-102,

 From Phases II-IV, the changes in plant use might
 be related to the household lifecycle, with an
 increase of members or with children reaching
 young adulthood. Either case would necessitate

 181). Enslaved subsistence strategies also served

 as a vehicle for creating distinctive Creole foodways

 more intensive production activities, as a result of
 higher rates of household consumption (e.g.,
 Groover 2001). If so, the data strongly suggest that

 that played an important role in African American
 identity formation (Franklin 2001; Yentsch 1994).

 In contrast to the plants produced by the house

 hold, there were also crops that households pro

 plantation rations did not keep up with demand, and
 that Rich Neck's household was largely responsi
 ble for the "well-being" of its members. Specimens
 representing garden crops and wild plants were
 more stable over time, and in the case of honey
 locust and black walnut, these generally multiplied

 duced but nonetheless were most likely provisioned

 by the slaveowner (corn, rye, barley, and wheat). Of
 these crops, only corn appears to have been regu
 larly consumed (Table 4). Corn was the most fre

 quently provisioned staple throughout the plantation

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 716 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4, 2008]

 100% -j.--. -.

 90%-,- -j

 80%-1

 70% .|-j-1

 376

 60% -|- j-;

 ^H 42? ^_ | j n Garden/Orchard species I

 50% -1-^H-H|-^fl- -! Wild Species

 I ^m l.ccp, I

 0% i-J?^?^?^?^^H^..,

 Rich Neck North Nil Quarter Southall Wilton

 Figure 6. Percentages of garden/orchard, wild, and crop specimens by site. Note: Specimens identified as "weeds" and
 "weed-grasses" are excluded.

 South (Heath 1999:60; Hilliard 1988). Virginia ex
 slaves mentioned corn as a typical meal in their
 autobiographies (Fedric 2001[1863]:7; Randolph
 1969:18; Smith 2001[1881]:8), and historical

 1997:119-120). As Lorena Walsh (1997:120)
 points out, this was "a strategy that spread risk and

 minimized the impact of price declines for any one
 of the three staple crops." Planters were also
 responding to the depletion of soils due to the over
 planting of tobacco and the growing demand for
 cereal in Europe (Berlin 1998:134-135). Grains
 were used both to support the plantation, but more

 records for colonial Virginia confirm this (Morgan
 1998:134; Sanford 1994:125; Walsh 1997:89). As

 previously noted, barrels of corn and mill pecks
 were stored at Rich Neck, and it is almost certain

 that these were part of the rations distributed to the

 enslaved population. The absence of corncobs also
 suggests, but does not confirm, that corn was
 rationed rather than cultivated in private gardens.
 While this may account for the presence of corn,

 importantly, for export. The occupation span of the
 site (circa 1740-1770s) does correspond to the era
 when crop diversification heightened in Virginia.
 Ludwell and his predecessors undoubtedly had
 grains growing on their plantations prior to 1740,
 if only for supporting livestock and meeting sub

 wheat, rye, and barley in the Phase m and IV assem

 blages, it does not address their absence in the Phase
 II assemblage. Nor does a smaller household ade

 sistence needs. Yet the farming of corn and wheat
 in particular probably expanded on Ludwell plan

 quately account for the absence of grains. Instead,
 the plantation economy may have been the most
 influential factor.

 The complete lack of provisioned crops during
 Phase II and their appearance thereafter (Figure 5)

 reaching young adulthood, however, may have con

 enslaved population by Phase III. A household with
 increasing members, or a household with children

 labor regiment and the food rations provided to the

 tations by mid-century, resulting in changes to the

 may possibly signal a transformation in the plan

 tation economy. During the mid-eighteenth century,
 most Tidewater planters shifted from tobacco
 monoculture to crop diversification by cultivating
 corn and wheat (Samford 2004:153; Walsh

 tributed to the increase of garden and wild species
 as more food was needed. With a heightened
 demand on food resources, the production strate
 gies controlled largely by the enslaved household
 stepped up in use and diversified.

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 717

 The Phase V assemblage is less varied than

 either the Phase III or IV assemblages (Table 4).
 Overall, the specimens representing garden, wild,
 and crop genera and species decrease (although,

 again, honey locust is disproportionately present).
 The relative lack of black walnuts, which were con

 sumed in more substantial numbers during the two

 previous phases, could be due to landscape changes,
 as could the absence of acorns. Yet the general
 decrease in plant diversity and seed and nutshell
 frequencies (especially garden and crop domesti
 cates) during Phase V may have been the result of
 external pressures. By 1778, around the time that
 Structure 1 was abandoned, Williamsburg had
 become a battleground. American soldiers were
 encamped in town, and battles were waged within
 easy walking distance from Rich Neck. These
 events, no doubt, had a profound effect on the

 enslaved community. With the owners of Rich Neck

 residing in London throughout the war, the pro
 duction of crops and other plantation tasks were
 probably disrupted. The decrease in plant domes

 ticates (both crop- and garden-related) at Rich Neck

 may signify the effects of war and the anticipation
 of escape from bondage.

 The results suggest a household subsistence

 the enslaved Virginian household economy. The
 four additional sites chosen for this analysis
 included the Wilton Plantation quarter site on the
 James River in Henrico County (Higgins et al.
 2000), Southall's Quarter in James City County
 (Pullins et al. 2003), and the North Hill (Heath
 2007a) and Quarter (Heath 2007b) sites at Thomas

 Jefferson's Poplar Forest in Bedford County (Heath
 2001; Raymer 1996, 2003). Along with the Rich
 Neck Slave Quarter, all five sites were domestic

 sites occupied by enslaved blacks during the sec
 ond half of the eighteenth century.

 The Wilton Plantation quarter was part of a large

 tobacco plantation of 2,500 acres that belonged to
 the Randolph family over five generations (circa
 1750-1840). Period I (circa 1750-1790) is con
 sidered here. During this time the single dwelling
 was occupied by 12 to 15 enslaved blacks. This
 group of skilled workers lived 365 m from the
 planter's mansion. Southall's Quarter was occu
 pied between 1750 and 1800. Although it remains

 unknown who owned the plantation during the first

 half of the quarter's occupation, James Southall
 held deed to the 920-acre property between 1782

 and 1801. Southall owned the Raleigh Tavern in
 Williamsburg, and he was an absentee planter who

 regime based on both cultivated and wild plants,

 resided in town. Southall kept a rotating number of

 but with a more consistent reliance on wild plants

 throughout the occupation span of the site leading
 up to abandonment. While it may be tempting to

 attribute the changes in plant use over time solely
 to the life cycle of the household or other internal
 factors, we must contextualize Rich Neck more

 broadly within the plantation system, and greater
 colonial society, and recognize that the economic,
 social, and political forces at work played a major
 role in the lives of its inhabitants as well.

 Comparative Perspective

 five to 12 enslaved individuals on his plantation
 (Pullins et al. 2003). His enslaved work force split

 their duties between the tavern and plantation where

 they tended his livestock operation and probably
 grew crops. The North Hill (circa 1770-1785) and
 Quarter (circa 1790-1812) sites were both part of
 the 5,000-acre, Poplar Forest plantation located in
 the Piedmont region (Heath 2001; Raymer 2003).
 The single household represented by the North Hill

 site consisted of residents who were mainly field
 hands who labored under the supervision of a plan
 tation manager since Jefferson had yet to establish

 In relation to our second goal, which was to dis

 his villa retreat at the plantation. In contrast, the

 cern the nature of African-American plant use, we
 embarked upon a comparative analysis of botani

 Quarter site occupants experienced the property's
 transition from a farm with an absentee owner to a

 cal assemblages from slave-related sites in Virginia.
 To date, nearly all of the archaeological analyses
 concerning enslaved African-American plant use
 consists of site-specific studies (for exceptions see
 Franklin 2004; Raymer 2003). We offer a prelim
 inary, comparative assessment of botanical assem

 blages from five sites, including Rich Neck, in an
 effort to move toward a broader interpretation of

 plantation where Jefferson eventually took greater
 charge over his plantation affairs (Heath 2007b).

 The occupants of the three houses that make up the
 Quarter site were a mix of field hands and skilled
 artisans.

 The intensive sampling and flotation program

 employed at Rich Neck contrasts with the sam

 pling protocols employed at each of the other sites

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 CO

 > m D O > z > z H O c

 I w z o  ro o o CO

 _Name_Name_Neck %_Hill %_Quarter %_Quarter %_Period I %

 Common Scientific Rich North Southall's Wilton

 Table 5. Botanical Specimens, Rich Neck Slave Quarter, North Hill, Quarter Site, Southall's Quarter, and Wilton Plantation Quarter (Period I).

 Crops Corn Zea mays 30 4.5 273 31.4 45 34.9 53 42.1 6 2.1

 Cowpea Vigna sp. 187 28.2 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Grape Vitis sp. ? ? 3 .3 2 1.6 ? ? ? ?

 Peach Prunus per sic a ? ? 158 18.2 38 29.5 ? ? ? ?

 Cultivated ? ? 3 .3 2 1.6? ___

 Wheat Triticum aestivum 6 .9 134 15.4 3 2.3 12 9.5 8 2.8

 Bedstraw Galium sp. 1 .2 4 .5 2 1.6 ? ? ? ?

 Violet Viola sp. ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Little barley Hordeum pusillum 18 2.7 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Cherry Prunus sp. 6 .9 ? ? 2 1.6 ? ? 3 1.1

 Common Phaseolous 3 .5 6 .7 1 .8 1 .8 4 1.4

 Lima bean Phaseolous lunatis 1.2 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Melon Citrullus lanatus 2.3 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Peanut Arachis hypogaea 1.2 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Sweet Potato Ipomoea batatas ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 244 86.8

 Rye Secale cereale 4.6 4.5 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Oats Avena sativa ? ? 1 .1 ? ? ? ? 3 1.1

 Carpetweed Mollugo verticillata ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Elderberry Sambucus Canadensis ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Garden/ Bean Phaseolus sp. 23 3.5 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Huckleberry Gaylussacia sp. ? ? ? ? 21.6 ? ? ? ?

 Poppy Papaver sp. ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Squash Cucurbita pepo 1.2 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Sunflower Helianthus sp. ? ? 1.1 2 1.6 1 .8 ? ?

 Strawberry Frageria sp. ? ? 4 .5 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Sorghum Sorghum sp. ? ? 5 .6 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Wheat or Oat Triticum/Avena ? ? ? ? ? ? 21.6 ? ?

 Wild plants Acorn Quercus sp. 11 1.7 2.2 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Orchard Blackberry/ Rubus sp. 3 .5 26 3.0 3 2.3 ? ? 3 ?

 Bean vulgaris

 Raspberry

 Grain

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 u m o  0)

 Totals_664 100.0_870 100.0_129 100.0_126 100.0_281 100.0

 Hickory Carya sp. _ _ 12 1.4 3 2.3 13 10.3 2 .7

 Goosefoot Chenopodium sp. ? ? 34 3.9 2 1.6 ? ? 1 .4

 Nightshade Solanum sp. ? ? 2 .2 ? ? ? ? ?

 Black walnut Juglans nigra 113 17.0 ? ? 11 8.5 31 24.6 3 1.1

 Walnut Juglans sp. ? ? ? ? ? ? 21.6 ?

 Ragweed Ambrosia sp. ? ? 23 2.6 ? ? ? ? ?

 Jimsonweed Datura stramonium ? ? 8.9 1.8 ? ? ?

 Honey locust Gleditsia triacanthos L. 250 37.7 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Knotweed Polygonum sp. ? ? 41 4.7 ? ? ? ? 7 2.5

 Persimmon Diospyros virginiana ? ? 1 .1 3 2.3 1 .8

 Purslane Portulaca oleracea ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ?

 Sheep sorrel Rumex acetolsella 1.2 ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

 smartweed pennsylvanicum ? ? 141.6 21.6 ? ?

 Pigweed Amaranthus sp. ? ? 2.2 ? ? ? ?

 Sumac Rhus sp. ? ? 16 1.8 ? ? ? ? ?

 Vervain Verbena sp. ? ? 2 .2 ? ? ? ? ?

 Sorrel/Dock Rumex sp. ? ? 20 2.3 ? ? ? ? ?

 Weed Copperleaf Acalypha virginica ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ?

 Walnut family Juglandaceae ? ? ? ? ? ? 107.9

 Sedge Carex sp. 3 .5 ? ? ? ? ? ?

 Hickory/Walnut? ? 39 4.5 ? ? ? _ _ ?

 Pennsylvania Polygonum

 Prickly mallow Sida spinosa ? ? 2.2 ? ? ? ?

 Goosegrass Eleusine indica ? ? 1.1 1.8 ? ? ?

 Grass Family Gramineae ? ? 17 2.0 43.1 ? ? ?

 Weed?Grass Agropyron Agropyron ? ? 4.5 ? ? ? ? ?

 Unknown (Composite Family) ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ?

 Unknown (Bean Family) ? ? 1.1 ? ? ? ? ?

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 720 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 (McKnight 2000,2003; Raymer 1996,2003). This
 might explain the differences between the number

 is also true of the reliance on wild fruits and nuts

 and their obvious link to foraging behavior. There

 of specimens recovered from Rich Neck (n = 700;
 Table 2) and those recovered from the Wilton (n =

 are other plants that appear to have been part of the
 diet that suggest an even heavier reliance on for

 281; 244 of which represent one plant type, sweet
 potato), Southall's Quarter (n = 126), and Quarter
 sites (n = 129) (Table 5). However, the same can
 not be said of the North Hill site where the assem

 blage consisted of 870 specimens (Table 5). The
 size of the North Hill assemblage may also explain
 the richness of the archaeobotanical record with 39

 different genus or families represented and 16
 species identified (Raymer 2003:8). Although the
 Rich Neck assemblage has close to the number of
 species identified (n = 12), the number of actual

 plants represented is dwarfed by that from North
 Hill (19 vs. 39). Given that the sampling regime
 employed during the collection and processing of

 samples from North Hill was not as comprehensive

 as that employed at Rich Neck, it seems that at best

 our approach resulted in a maximum return on what
 appears to be a less than rich botanical record.

 Despite the differences in sampling protocols
 and overall sizes of the assemblages, the five sites

 aging among some of these populations. The gath
 ering of goosefoot, knotweed, and smartweed
 appears to have dietary implications. The leaves of
 these ruderals could have served as greens in the
 diet of the North Hill inhabitants where they
 appeared in the greatest numbers.

 While our analysis reveals a broad pattern of gar

 dening and foraging activities, and a dependence
 on provisioned crops to support enslaved house

 holds' dietary, and possibly medicinal needs, there
 are notable differences in the overall percentages
 of garden/orchard, crop, and wild specimens
 between the sites (Figure 6). For example, garden
 ing appears to have been a less important house
 hold economic strategy at the North Hill and
 Southall's quarters (Figure 6). Since crop speci
 mens dominate the assemblages from these two
 sites, site inhabitants may have received larger
 rations that alleviated their need to forage and gar

 den. Conversely, given that the Wilton quarter was

 are comparable in some respects since broad pat

 home to skilled workers, one might have expected

 terns of household production strategies and plan

 that their overall standard of living (which would

 tation rationing systems do emerge.

 include more rations) might be better and therefore

 Foremost among these are the similarities in a

 alleviate the need to maintain a garden, but the evi

 reliance on gardening and foraging to complement
 a varying dependency on crops. In fact, all five
 assemblages contained maize and wheat speci
 mens, which indicate that these crops were regu

 larly rationed to both skilled and field laborers
 across Virginia plantations. Householders at Rich
 Neck and North Hill also consumed other field sta

 ples such as rye, barley, and sorghum that appear
 in smaller numbers. The inhabitants of all five sites

 participated in gardening, yet the only species found
 among all of the assemblages was the common
 bean. Similarly, nuts and fruits were recovered from

 all of the sites, but no single species appeared in all
 the assemblages. All but the Wilton assemblage
 included more than a single fruit species such as
 blackberry/raspberry, peach, melon, and persim
 mon, and the majority of the assemblages con
 tained black walnut and hickory remains.

 The presence of both garden/orchard and field
 crops speaks to a level of comparability regarding
 the participation in gardening and a reliance on
 slaveowners' provisions at all of the sites. The same

 dence does not support this hypothesis. Moreover,
 the opposite is true, although this is based almost
 exclusively on the sweet potato remains found at
 the site. Yet, if these are removed then the entire
 Wilton assemblage is quite small. One downside
 to this is that it weakens the comparative value of
 the assemblage as a whole, which is unfortunate
 because it stands out as indicating much less
 reliance on foraging than at the other sites. In fact,
 there were smaller percentages of foraged plant

 remains not only in the Wilton assemblage, but also
 from the two Poplar Forest ones (Figure 6). The
 greater dependence on foraged plants among the
 Rich Neck and Southall's Quarter occupants is dif

 ficult to explain. Although both sites were outly
 ing plantations with slaveowner absenteeism
 (which may have provided greater opportunities to
 venture beyond the quarters in search of wild
 plants), the Poplar Forest sites were also occupied
 during a period of planter absenteeism. Thus,
 whether this variability in the percentages of wild

 plants otherwise reflects differences in the amount

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 of time available to devote to foraging or is just an

 (from 1665 to the 1770s), helping to maintain a rel

 REPORTS 721

 artifact of preservation is not clear.

 Although the level of variability evident between
 the five botanical assemblages is somewhat strik

 ing, it probably reflects points along a continuum
 of household production strategies commonly prac

 ative degree of family and household stability over
 time that was nurtured within this quarter (e.g.,
 Walsh 1997). The temporal analysis of botanical
 data further suggests household growth during the
 time of Structure 1 's habitation.

 ticed by enslaved Africans on Virginia plantations.

 The process of creolization may be evident in

 From this perspective, notable differences such as
 the large number of cowpea and honey locust seeds
 recovered from Rich Neck, which appear nowhere

 the use of plants at Rich Neck, through the blend
 ing of knowledge from Native American, Anglo
 American, African, and creole (i.e., American

 else, are still viewed as part of the same overall eco

 born) black cultural practices. Until at least the end

 nomic strategy shared by other enslaved commu
 nities regardless of their status as field hands or
 skilled laborers. That is, there was a continuing

 need to complement their rations with plants grown

 in their gardens or foraged in the environments
 available to them. Some of these plants functioned
 in a variety of cultural contexts and as such
 enhanced the overall well-being of these groups.
 Perhaps the most obvious examples are the sun
 flower seeds found at both sites at Poplar Forest
 and Southall's Quarter. Sunflowers provided seeds
 that could be consumed, but they also served as

 of the seventeenth century in Virginia, Native
 Americans were also enslaved alongside Africans,
 and their presence in the Tidewater and social inter
 actions with Africans were more common than in

 the following century (Morgan 1998:477-480).
 Information about the possible uses native plant
 species, such as honey locust and black walnut,
 may have been passed on to Africans by local Indi
 ans, although this notion carries with it diffusion

 ist overtones that negate the obvious possibility that

 Africans learned how to use these plants on their
 own. There seems little question that Africans car

 ornamental plants. The same is true of the lone vio

 ried knowledge of wild plant use with them to the

 let seed recovered from the North Hill quarter. This

 too suggests a plant whose chief purpose may have
 been as an ornamental.

 The small numbers of ornamental plants repre
 sented in the five assemblages does tend to weaken
 any argument for their importance. Yet, this
 assumes a connection between the ubiquity of the
 plant type and its significance to the groups who
 cultivated them. A similar assumption concerning
 material culture is now being challenged in favor
 of a more complementary approach in which indi
 vidual artifacts are not ignored because of small
 numbers (Mrozowski 2006). From this perspective
 ornamental plants may have been equally impor
 tant as those which played more significant roles
 in the diets of the various populations.

 Conclusion

 Rich Neck was a semi-rural plantation whose res

 New World, which presents yet another example
 of social interaction and potential for creolization

 linked to plant use. By the mid-eighteenth century,
 the age distribution among the 21 individuals resid
 ing at Rich Neck indicates that as many as five
 elderly individuals may have been African born.

 These Africans could have been responsible for the

 transmission of knowledge concerning medicinal
 plant use, food preparation techniques, and the
 cultivation of African plant species (e.g., black
 eyed peas) to their American-born children and
 other enslaved blacks present (Franklin 2001;
 Yentsch 1994). Nor can we preclude the social
 interaction between English colonists and enslaved
 Africans and blacks, and the influence this had on

 each group's foodways. Along with the introduc
 tion of Old World plant and animal species to Vir
 ginia, methods for raising livestock, cultivating
 commercial and garden species, and food prepa
 ration techniques were also initiated within the

 idents worked to achieve some level of autonomy

 plantation context. For example, plantation provi

 within the system of slavery by creating their own

 forms of social organization and by instituting cul

 tural practices that included plant use. Rich Neck's
 enslaved community may have been passed down
 the Ludwell line relatively intact for over 100 years

 sions included pork and beef, which were heavily
 relied upon for protein among the enslaved at Rich
 Neck (Franklin 2004:185-205) and elsewhere in
 Virginia (Atkins 1994; Bowen 1996; Crader 1990;
 Kelso 1997; McKee 1987, 1988).

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 722 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 A final quote from the traveler William Hugh
 Grove helps to conceptualize how enslaved Vir
 ginians drew from various sources in producing a
 creolized foodways system. Grove observed the
 use of corn among the enslaved:

 Tis the only support of the Negroes, who roast

 it in the ear, bake it for bread, boyl it when
 hulled, and like our buttered wheat, the chil
 dren and better sort breakfast with it and make

 farmity. The first they call homeny, the latter

 mush. To hull it they beat it in a mortar as the

 scots doe their barley [Stiverson and Butler
 1977:33].

 Thus, enslaved Africans grew corn, a native

 crop, using hoe cultivation taught first to English
 colonists by Indians (Potter and Waselkov 1994).
 They prepared corn by baking, roasting, and stew

 ing, which were cooking techniques with both West

 African and European antecedents (Franklin 2001;
 Yentsch 1994). While Grove notes that the Scots

 used mortars, the mortar and pestle were also com

 monly used in West Africa to process grains. This

 one example illustrates the results of a complex web
 of social interactions that led to a more expansive
 knowledge base of foodways to which Native
 Americans, Africans, and Anglos contributed and
 variously drew from in creating emergent house
 hold economies and foodways systems.

 Our interpretations of the botanical remains
 from Rich Neck assume that the foods?and pos

 sibly medicines?they represent were embedded
 within a broader cultural matrix that is indicated

 by the results of the comparative analysis. As evi

 dence of subsistence they speak to a varied diet that

 included field crops like corn, wheat, and barley as
 well as garden species like beans, melon, and
 squash. The tree fruits were possibly consumed in

 a variety of ways, providing an insight into differ
 ent food preparation strategies. Nuts from black
 walnut and oak trees could have been eaten either

 raw or roasted, and whole or mashed. Honey locust

 and black walnut were more intensively exploited,

 suggesting that these tree products in particular
 were a regular part of the household diet. Honey
 locust represents one possible example of a plant

 that may be best thought of as adding to the over

 all well-being of the group, rather than solely pro

 viding caloric and nutritional intake. The fact that
 it could have served as a sweet for both children

 and adults may elevate its status as a food that con

 tributed to a sense of well-being for the Rich Neck
 inhabitants. Conversely, it can be argued that if
 social and emotional well-being contribute to the
 physical well-being of a population then many of
 the food-related plants could be interpreted in the

 same manner that we have chosen to interpret the
 honey locust remains from Rich Neck.

 The role of wild plants, while obviously impor
 tant, should not cloud the significance of planter

 provisioning with regard to slaves' diets. The com
 parative analysis revealed that some enslaved
 households may have received larger rations that
 likely played a role in their decision to pursue gar
 dening at a much smaller scale than at the other
 sites. The presence of a number of staple crops
 indicates a well-developed plantation economy in
 which food was being produced for the tables of
 all involved. Another possibility is that the staples

 represent food that was both provisioned and some
 times poached. Isaac (1982:52-53) imagines a
 slave's landscape as being comprised of places that
 were off limits to slaves: "Here would stand acorn

 house, perhaps, that was from time to time illicitly

 opened, by loosening the boards in the gable end,

 to supplement the rations of hungry families." Com
 bined with the knowledge of useful wild plants to
 add variety to their diet, Rich Neck's household

 may well have taken the opportunity to add to their
 stores through the illicit means Isaac envisions.

 Combined with the results of the faunal analy
 sis, the botanical data also speak to a diversified
 household economic strategy that relied upon wild

 plants and animals, a pattern found in other stud
 ies of African-American populations including the
 Wilton, Southall's Quarter, Quarter, and North Hill
 sites (Heath 2007a, 2007b; Higgins et al. 2000;
 Pullins et al. 2003), as well as others throughout
 the southeastern United States (Ferguson 1992;
 McKee 1999; Reitz 1986, 1994; Wilkie
 2000:134-147; Yentsch 1994). Beyond what this
 says about the richness of their diet, the many fish,

 small mammals, birds and wild plants indicate that
 Rich Neck's household members did not simply
 confine themselves within the boundaries of the

 slave quarter. With or without the threat of pun

 ishment for leaving the quarter, these individuals
 clearly did so in order to exploit the natural
 resources surrounding them.

 In terms of what the results suggest about the

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 723

 character of plant use at Rich Neck over time, there

 are clearly defined patterns. There are differences

 in assemblage diversity and specimen frequencies
 between the early and later phases of occupation
 that point to the intensification of production and
 consumption activities associated with plant use.

 Changes in the frequencies of grains over time may

 of defunct pits with trash initially disposed of in
 the refuse midden (Franklin 2004:141-166). Based
 on the results from Rich Neck, it seems clear that

 the sampling approach we employed produced evi
 dence of greater plant diversity and a more accu
 rate representation of the site's botanical
 assemblage. This is consistent with the results of

 have resulted from modifications to the plantation
 economy, while the lack of wild species by Phase
 V might indicate landscape changes. Yet shifts in
 dietary preferences, the household life cycle, and

 similar experiments conducted by Pearsall (1989),
 who found that greater diversity was seen with
 more sampling.

 Another benefit of the Rich Neck botanical

 the pressures of war on the home front are also sig
 nificant factors that should be taken into consider

 ations While our interpretation of the relationship
 between transformations in plant use and the house

 hold life cycle is inconclusive, we hope that it serves

 analysis is to provide further data for comparative

 studies. Only with the kind of comparative analy
 sis carried out here can we begin to explore the
 broader, more entangled issues of African dias
 poric cultural transformations in the Americas.

 as a point of entry for future household-level analy
 ses of slave-related sites that may help to clarify
 the issue. The centrality of the household in
 enslaved societies as a form of social organization
 and as a key site for sociocultural and economic

 production certainly merits further research.

 If there is one conclusion that can be offered

 without qualification, it is that the sampling pro
 gram conducted was successful. This is based upon
 a comparison of the Rich Neck botanical assem
 blage with those from other slave-related sites such
 as King's Bay Plantation, and Yaughan and Curri
 boo plantations (see also Franklin 2004:167-184).

 The practice of collecting limited numbers of sam
 ples from selected features in the field, or sub

 sampling after the material has been collected, have

 proven utility under constraints of time or funding.
 What these approaches do not appear to generate

 is a more comprehensive representation of the rich

 ness of plants being exploited. We attempted to
 eliminate "feature bias" where only pits and hearths
 are sampled by sampling additional types of con
 texts. As Lennstrom and Hastorf (1995:702) posit,
 "knowing where archaeobotanical remains do not

 occur is just as important as knowing where they
 are found" (emphasis in original). That only two
 of the 700 specimens we recovered were from non

 pit features suggests that charred plant remains
 were deposited in root cellars on enslaved Virgin
 ian sites as the result of cultural activities. These

 included the maintenance of the communal refuse

 midden (Figure 3) and hearth areas through sweep

 ing and controlled refuse disposal, and the filling

 Plants were part of the landscape of eighteenth
 century Virginia that contributed to the cultural
 consciousness of Afro-Virginian populations.
 Whether the environment was seen as foreign or

 familiar, it became part of the world as experienced.

 Part of that experience was realized through the
 exploitation of both wild and domesticated plants
 in the forging of cultural practices, social institu

 tions, and a collective identity among the enslaved
 Africans and blacks who lived at Rich Neck.

 Acknowledgments. This research is the result of a collabora

 tive effort to investigate the history and archaeology of the
 Rich Neck site. Thus, there are many people we would like
 to thank. The Department of Archaeological Research at
 Colonial Williamsburg under the directorship of Marley R.
 Brown III provided generous support for this research, and

 Brown had the foresight not to limit the scope of the project.
 We would also like to acknowledge and thank David
 Muraca, Anna Agbe-Davies, Greg Brown, Leslie McFaden,
 Kelly Ladd, Fred Smith, Bill Pittman, Steve Atkins, Joanne

 Bowen, Whitney Battle, Jennifer Gates-Foster, and Andy
 Edwards who have all provided their time and efforts to the
 Rich Neck Plantation project. Steven Atkins and Jeremiah

 Dandoy carried out the flotation and began preliminary scan

 ning and analysis of the botanical samples. Kate Meatyard
 established a more comprehensive botanical type collection

 which we depended upon for this analysis. Their work set the
 stage for ours. We are also grateful for the generous assis

 tance of Richard Flores and Heather Harvey in the prepara

 tion of this manuscript. Finally, we extend our gratitude to

 Ywone Edwards-Ingram, Barbara Heath, Heather Trigg, and
 to three anonymous reviewers who provided constructive

 critiques and invaluable suggestions/comments that helped
 us to strengthen and improve this manuscript. We are
 indebted to them.

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 724 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 References Cited

 1990 Slave Diet at Monticello. American Antiquity

 Agbe-Davies, Anna

 1999 Archaeological Excavations of a Small Cellar on Rich
 Neck Plantation. Colonial Williamsburg Archaeological
 Reports. Copies available from the Department of Archae
 ological Research, The Colonial Williamsburg Foundation,
 Williamsburg, Virginia.

 Allison, Penelope M. (editor)

 1999 The Archaeology of Household Activities. Routledge,

 London.

 Anderson, Nesta

 2004 Finding the Space Between Spatial Boundaries and
 Social Dynamics: The Archaeology of Nested Households.
 In Household Chores and Household Choices: Theoriz

 ing the Domestic Sphere in Historical Archaeology, edited
 by Kerri S. Barile and Jamie C. Brandon, pp. 109-120.
 University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

 Atkins, Stephen C.

 1994 An Archaeological Perspective on the African
 American Slave Diet at Mount Vernon's House for Fami
 lies. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of
 Anthropology, The College of William and Mary,
 Williamsburg.

 Barile, Kerri S., and Jamie C. Brandon (editors)

 55(4):690-717.
 Dawdy, Shannon, (editor)

 2000 Creolization. Historical Archaeology 34(3).

 Deagan, Kathleen A.

 1996 Environmental Archaeology and Historical Archae
 ology. In Case Studies in Environmental Archaeology,
 edited by Elizabeth J. Reitz, Lee A. Newsom, and Sylvia
 J. Scudder, pp. 359-376. Plenum Press, New York.

 Doepkens, William P.

 1991 Excavations at Mareen Duvall's Middle Plantation

 of South River Hundred. Gateway Press, Baltimore.

 Drummond, Lee

 1980 The Cultural Continuum: A Theory of Intersystems.
 Man 15:352-374.

 Duke, James A.

 1983a Handbook of Energy Crops. Electronic document,
 http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/duke_energy/Gled
 itsia_triacanthos.html, accessed November 1, 2003.

 1983b Handbook of Energy Crops. Electronic document,

 http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/duke_energy/
 Juglans_nigra.html, accessed November 1, 2003.

 Duke, James A., and K. K. Wain

 1981 Medicinal Plants of the World, Computer index with

 more than 85,000 entries. 3 vols.

 2004 Household Chores and Household Choices: Theo

 Durie, Mason

 rizing the Domestic Sphere in Historical Archaeology.
 University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

 1999 Mental Health and Maori Development. The Aus
 tralian andNew Zealand Journal ofPsychiatry 33(1):5-12.

 Battle, Whitney

 Edwards, Ywone D.

 2004 A Space of Our Own: Redefining the Enslaved House
 hold at Andrew Jackson's Hermitage Plantation. In House
 hold Chores and Household Choices: Theorizing the
 Domestic Sphere in Historical Archaeology, edited by
 Kerri S. Barile and Jamie C. Brandon, pp. 33-50. Univer
 sity of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

 1998 "Trash" Revisited: A Comparative Approach to His
 torical Descriptions and Archaeological Analysis of Slave
 Houses and Yards. In Keep Your Head to the Sky: Inter
 preting African American Home Ground, edited by Grey
 Gundaker, pp. 245-329. University of Virginia, Char
 lottesville.

 Beals, Janette, Spero M. Mason, Christian M. Mitchell, Paul

 Edwards-Ingram, Ywone

 Spicer, and the AI-SUPERPFP Team

 2003 Cultural Specificity and Comparison in Psychiatric
 Epidemiology: Walking the Tightrope in American Indian
 Research. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 27:259-289.

 Beaudry, Mary C.

 2004 Doing the Housework: New Approaches to Archae

 ology of Households. In Household Chores and House
 hold Choices: Theorizing the Domestic Sphere in
 Historical Archaeology, edited by Kerri S. Barile and Jamie
 C. Brandon, pp. 254-262. University of Alabama Press,
 Tuscaloosa.
 Bender, Donald

 1967 A Refinement of the Concept of Household: Fami
 lies, Co-residence, and Domestic Functions. American
 Anthropologist 69:493-504.

 Berlin, Ira

 1998 Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of
 Slavery in North America. The Belknap Press of Harvard
 University, Cambridge.

 Bowen, Joanne

 1996 Foodways in the 18th-Century Chesapeake. In The
 Archaeology ofl8th-Century Virginia, edited by Theodore
 R. Reinhart, pp. 87-130. Spectrum Press, Richmond, Vir
 ginia.

 Brathwaite, Edward K.

 1971 The Development of Creole Society in Jamaica,

 1770-1820. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

 Burton, Richard D. E.

 1997 Afro-Creole: Power, Opposition, and Play in the

 Caribbean. Cornell University Press, Ithaca.

 Crader, Diana C.

 1999 The Recent Archaeology of Enslaved Africans and
 African Americans. In Old and New Worlds, edited by
 Geoff Egan and Ronald L. Michael, pp. 155-164. Oxbow
 Books, Oxford.

 2001 African American Medicine and the Social Relations

 of Slavery. In Race and the Archaeology of Identity, edited
 by Charles E. Orser, Jr., pp. 34-53. University of Utah
 Press, Salt Lake City.

 Fedric, Francis

 2001 [1863] Slave Life in Virginia and Kentucky; or, Fifty
 Years of Slavery in the Southern States of America.
 Wertheim, Macintosh, and Hunt, London. Electronic doc
 ument, http://docsouth.unc.edu/fedric/menu.html,
 accessed February 29, 2004. Documenting the American
 South, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
 Libraries.
 Ferguson, Leland

 1992 Uncommon Ground: Archaeology and Early African
 America, 1650-1800. Smithsonian Institution, Washing
 ton, D.C.

 Fesler, Garrett R.

 2004a From Houses to Homes: An Archaeological Case
 Study of Household Formation at the Utopia Slave Quar
 ter, ca. 1675-1775. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
 Department of Anthropology, University of Virginia, Char
 lottesville.

 2004b Living Arrangements among Enslaved Women and
 Men at an Early-Eighteenth-Century Virginia Quartering
 Site. In Engendering African American Archaeology,
 edited by Jillian E. Galle and Amy L. Young, pp. 177-236.
 University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 725

 Franklin, Maria

 1997 Out of Site, Out of Mind: The Archaeology of an
 Enslaved Virginian Household, c. 1740-1778. PhD. dis
 sertaion. Department of Anthropology, University of Cal
 ifornia Berkeley. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor.

 2001 The Archaeological and Symbolic Dimensions of Soul
 Food: Race, Culture, and Afro-Virginian Identity. In Race,
 Material Culture, and the Archaeology of Identity, edited
 by Charles E. Orser, Jr., pp. 88-107. University of Utah
 Press, Salt Lake City.

 2004 An Archaeological Study of the Rich Neck Slave Quar
 ter and Enslaved Domestic Life. Colonial Williamsburg
 Research Publications, Williamsburg, VA.

 Gardner, Paul S.

 1983 The Analysis and Interpretation of Plant Remains
 from the Yaughan and Curriboo Planatations, Berkeley
 County, South Carolina. In Yaughan and Curriboo Plan
 tations: Studies in African American Archaeology, edited
 by Thomas R. Wheaton, Patrick Garrow, and Amy Fried
 lander, pp. G1-G20. Soils Systems, Marietta, Georgia.

 Genovese, Eugene D.

 1972 Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made. Pan

 theon Books, New York.

 Gibbs, Patricia A.

 1999 "Little Spots Allow'd Them": Slave Garden Plots and
 Poultry Yards. The Colonial Williamsburg Interpreter
 20(4):9-13.

 Goody, Jack

 1972 The Evolution of the Family. In Household and Fam
 ily in Past Time, edited by Peter Laslett and Richard Wall,
 pp. 103-124. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

 Grime, William E. (editor)

 1979 Ethno-Botany of the Black Americans. Reference Pub

 lications, Algonac, Michigan.

 Groover, Mark D.

 2001 Linking Artifact Assemblages to Household Cycles:
 An Example from the Gibbs Site. Historical Archaeology
 35(4):38-57.

 Groover, Mark D., and Timothy Baumann

 1996 "They Worked Their Own Remedy": African
 American Herbal Medicine and the Archaeological
 Record. South Carolina Antiquities 28(1?2):21?32.

 Gundaker, Grey

 1998 Signs of Diaspora, Diaspora of Signs: Literacies, Cre
 olization, and Vernacular Practices in African America.
 Oxford University Press, Oxford.

 Gutman, Herbert G.

 1976 The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom,

 1750-1925. Vintage Books, New York.

 Hammel, Eugene A., and Peter Laslett

 1974 Comparing Household Structure Over Time and
 Between Cultures. Comparative Studies in Society and
 History 16:73-109.

 Hannerz, Ulf

 Archaeology, edited by Jillian E. Galle and Amy L. Young,
 pp. 19-38. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

 2007a North Hill: Background. The Digital Archaeologi
 cal Archive of Comparative Slavery, May 19, 2007
 (http://www.daacs.org/).

 2007b Quarter Site: Background. The Digital Archaeolog
 ical Archive of Comparative Slavery, May 19, 2007
 (http://www.daacs.org/).
 Heath, Barbara J., and Amber Bennett

 2000 "The Little Spots Allow'd Them": The Archaeologi
 cal Study of African-American Yards. Historical Archae
 ology 34(2):38-55.

 Hendon, Julia A.

 1996 Archaeological Approaches to the Organization of
 Domestic Labor: Household Practice and Domestic Rela

 tions. Annual Review of Anthropology 25:45-61.

 Herman, Bernard L.

 1984 Slave Quarters in Virginia: The Persona Behind His
 toric Artifacts. In The Scope of Historical Archaeology:
 Essays in honor of John L. Cotter, edited by David G. Orr
 and Daniel G. Crozier, pp. 253-283. Temple University,
 Philadelphia.

 Higgins III, Thomas F, Benjamin Ford, Charles M. Downing,
 Veronica L Deitrick, Stevan C. Pullins, and Dennis B.
 Blanton

 2000 Wilton Speaks: Archaeology at an Eighteenth- and
 Nineteenth-Century Plantation. Center for Archaeologi
 cal Research, The College of William and Mary, VA. Sub
 mitted to Virginia Department of Transportation, VDOT
 Project 0895-043-F01, PE101. Copies available from Cen
 ter for Archaeological Research, The College of William
 and Mary.
 Hilliard, SamB.

 1988 Hog Meat and Cornpone: Foodways in the Antebel
 lum South. In Material Life in America, 1600-1860, edited
 by Robert Blair St. George, pp. 311-332. Northeastern
 University Press, Boston.

 Isaac, Rhys

 1982 The Transformation of Virginia, 1740-1790. Univer

 sity of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

 Joyner, Charles

 1984 Down by the Riverside: A South Carolina Slave Com

 munity. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.

 Kelso, William M.

 1984 Kingsmill Plantations, 1619-1800: Archaeology of
 Country Life in Colonial Virginia. Academic Press/
 Orlando.

 1997 Archaeology at Monticello. Monticello Monograph
 Series. Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, Char
 lottesville.

 Kowal, Emma, Wendy Gunthorpe, and Ross S. Bailie

 2007 Measuring Emotional and Social Well Being in Abo
 riginal and Torres Strait Islander Populations: An Analy
 sis of a Negative Life Events Scale. International Journal

 1996 Transnational Connections. Routledge, London.

 for Equity in Health 6:18.

 Heath, Barbara J.

 Kulikoff, Allan

 1999 Hidden Lives: The Archaeology of Slave Life at
 Thomas Jefferson's Poplar Forest. University of Virginia
 Press, Charlottesville.

 2001 Bounded Yards and Fluid Borders: Landscapes of
 Slavery at Poplar Forest. In Places of Cultural Memory,
 African Reflections on the American Landscape Confer
 ences Proceedings, pp. 69-81. US Department of the Inte
 rior, National Park Service (http://www.cr.nps.gov/
 crdi/conferences/AFR_69-82_Heath.pdf).

 2004 Engendering Choice: Slavery and Consumerism in
 Central Virginia. In Engendering African American

 1986 Tobacco and Slaves. University of North Carolina

 Press, Chapel Hill.

 Lee Family Papers

 1638-1867 Hannah Philippa Lee appraisal of estate,
 1774-1775. MsslL51f, C227, frames 65-68, section 97.

 Virginia Historical Society, Richmond, Virginia.

 Lennstrom, Heidi A., and Christine A. Hastorf

 1995 Interpretation in Context: Sampling and Analysis in
 Paleoethnobotany. American Antiquity 60(4):701-721.

 Leone, Mark P., Gladys-Marie Fry, and Timothy Ruppel

 2001 Spirit Management among Americans of African

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 726 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 Descent. In Race and the Archaeology of Identity, edited
 by Charles E. Orser, Jr., pp. 143-157. University of Utah
 Press, Salt Lake City.

 Linebaugh, Donald W.

 1994 "All the Annoyances and Inconveniences of the Coun
 try": Environmental Factors in the Development of Out
 buildings in the Colonial Chesapeake. Winterthur Portfolio
 29(1):1-18.

 Linebaugh, Donald W., and Joe B. Jones

 1991 Phase III Data Recovery at Site 44JC240, Massie
 Farm Property, James City County, Virginia William and
 Mary Archaeological Project Center. Submitted to AES,
 A Professional Corporation, Williamsburg, VA. Copies
 available from William and Mary Archaeological Project
 Center. Williamsburg, Virginia.

 McFaden, Leslie, Phil Levy, David Muraca, and Jennifer Jones
 1999 Interim Report: The Archaeology of Rich Neck Plan

 tation, VDHRFile Number 97-1411-F. Colonial Williams

 burg Archaeological Reports. Copies available from the
 Department of Archaeological Research, The Colonial
 Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, Virginia.

 McKee, Larry W.

 1987 Delineating Ethnicity from the Garbage of Early Vir
 ginians: Faunal Remains from the Kingsmill Plantation
 Slave Quarter. American Archaeology 6(1):31?39.

 1988 Plantation Food Supply in Nineteenth-Century Tide
 water Virginia. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Depart
 ment of Anthropology, University of California, Berkeley.
 1999 Food Supply and Plantation Social Order. In /, Too,
 AmAmerica, edited by Theresa A. Singleton, pp. 218-239.
 University of Virginia Press, Charlottesville.

 McKnight, Justine W.

 2000 Appendix G: Archaeobotanical Analysis. In Wilton
 Speaks: Archaeology at an Eighteenth- and Nineteenth
 Century Plantation. Center for Archaeological Research,
 The College of William and Mary, VA. Submitted to Vir
 ginia Department of Transportation, VDOT Project 0895
 043-F01, PE101. Copies available from Center for
 Archaeological Research, The College of William and
 Mary.

 2003 Appendix E: Botanical Analysis. In Southall 's Quar

 ter: Archaeology at an Eighteenth-Century Slave Quarter
 in James City County. Center for Archaeological Research,
 The College of William and Mary, VA. Submitted to Vir
 ginia Department of Transportation, VDOT Project 0199
 047 110, PE101. Copies available from Center for Archae
 ological Research, The College of William and Mary.

 Malone, Ann Patton

 1992 Sweet Chariot: Slave Family and Household Struc
 ture in Nineteenth-Century Louisiana. University of North
 Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

 Miller, George L.

 39(2):70-83.
 Morgan, Philip D.

 1998 Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the Eighteenth
 Century Chesapeake and Low'country<. University of North
 Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

 Mouer, Daniel

 1991 "Root Cellars" Revisited African American Archae

 ology 5:5-6.
 Mrozowski, Stephen A.

 1983 Examining the Urban Environment Through the
 Analysis of Floral Remains. The Newsletter of the Con
 ference on New England Archaeology 3(2):31-50.
 1984 Prospects and Perspectives on an Archaeology of the

 Household. Man in the Northeast (27):31-49.

 1987 Exploring New England's Evolving Urban Landscape.
 In Living in Cities: Current Research in Urban Archaeol
 ogy, edited by Edward Staski, pp. 1-9. The Society for His
 torical Archaeology, Special Publication Series No. 5, Ann
 Arbor.

 1991 Landscapes of Inequality. In The Archaeology of
 Inequality, edited by Randall H. McGuire and Robert Payn
 ter, pp. 79-101. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.

 1999 Colonization and the Commodification of Nature.
 International Journal of Historical Archaeology
 3(3):153-166.

 2006 The Archaeology of Class in Urban America. Cam

 bridge University Press, Cambridge.

 Muraca, David

 1993 Archaeological Testing at Rich Neck. Colonial
 Williamsburg Archaeological Reports. Copies available
 from the Department of Archaeological Research, The
 Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, Vir
 ginia.

 Muraca, David, Philip Levy, and Leslie McFaden

 2003 The Archaeology of Rich Neck Plantation (44WB52):
 Description of the Features. Colonial Williamsburg
 Archaeological Reports. Copies available from the Depart
 ment of Archaeological Research, The Colonial Williams
 burg Foundation, Williamsburg, Virginia.

 Parker, Arthur C.

 1975 Parker on the Iroquois: Iroquois Uses of Maize and
 other Food Plants, The Code of Handsome Lake, the
 Seneca Prophet, the Constitution of the Five Nations. Syra
 cuse University Press, Syracuse.

 Pearsall, Deborah M.

 1989 Paleoethnobotany: A Handbook of Procedures. Aca

 demic Press, San Diego.

 Perdue, Charles L., Thomas E. Barden, and Robert K. Phillips

 (editors)

 1992 Weevils in the Wheat: Interviews with Virginia Ex

 Slaves. University of Virginia Press, Charlottesville.

 Potter, Stephen R., and Gregory A. Waselkov

 1991 A Revised Set of CC Index Values for Classification

 1994 "Whereby We Shall Enjoy Their Cultivated Places".

 and Economic Scaling of English Ceramics from 1787 to
 1880. Historical Archaeology 25(l):l-25.

 Miller, Naomi F.

 1989 What Mean These Seeds: A Comparative Approach

 to Archaeological Seed Analysis. Historical Archaeology
 23(2):50-59.

 Mintz, Sidney W., and Richard Price

 1992 The Birth of African-American Culture: An Anthro
 pological Perspective. 2nd ed. Beacon Press, Boston.

 Moerman, Daniel

 1998 Native American Ethnobotany. Timber Press, Portland.

 Moore, Stacy G.

 1989 Established and Well Cultivated: Afro-American
 Foodways in Early Virginia. Virginia Cavalcade

 In Historical Archaeology of the Chesapeake, edited by
 Paul A. Shackel and Barbara J. Little, pp. 23-33. Smith
 sonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

 Pounds, Norman J. G.

 1994 The Culture of the English People: Iron Age to the
 Industrial Revolution. Cambridge University Press, Cam
 bridge.

 Pullins, Stevan C, Joe B. Jones, John R. Underwood, Kimberly

 A. Ettinger and David W. Lewes

 2003 Southall's Quarter: Archaeology at an Eighteenth
 Century Slave Quarter in James City County. Center for
 Archaeological Research, The College of William and
 Mary, VA. Submitted to Virginia Department of Trans
 portation, VDOT Project 0199 047 110, PE101. Copies

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 REPORTS 727

 available from Center for Archaeological Research, The
 College of William and Mary.

 Washington, D.C.

 Scott, Elizabeth M.

 Randolph, Peter

 1969 Sketches of Slave Life. Second edition. Rhistoric Pub

 lications, Philadelphia.

 Raymer, Leslie

 1996 Macroplant Remains from the Jefferson's Poplar For
 est Slave Quarter: A Study in African American Subsis
 tence Practices. New South Associates Technical Report
 #402, Stone Mountain, Georgia.

 2003 Archaeobotanical Analysis from Data Recovery Exca
 vations at the North Hill and Quarter Sites. Jefferson's
 Poplar Forest: A Study of Enslaved African-American
 Subsistence Patterns, New South Associates Technical
 Report #781, Stone Mountain, GA.

 Reitz, Elizabeth

 1986 Urban/Rural Contrasts in Vertebrate Fauna from the
 Southern Coastal Plain. Historical Archaeology
 20(2):47-58.

 1994 Zooarchaeological Analysis of a Free African Amer
 ican Community: Gracia Real de Santa Teresa de Mose.

 Historical Archaeology 28( 1 ):23-40.
 Reitz, Elizabeth J., and C. Margaret Scarry

 1985 Reconstructing Historic Subsistence with an Exam
 ple from Sixteenth-Century Spanish Florida. Society for
 Historical Archaeology Special Publication Series, No. 3,
 Ann Arbor.

 Rock, Carolyn, and Lee Newsom

 1987 Botanical Analysis of the Privy Pits, Kings Bay Plan
 tation. In Historical Archaeology of Plantations at Kings
 Bay, Camden County, Georgia, edited by William H.
 Adams, pp. 441-442. Department of Anthropology, Uni
 versity of Florida, Gainesville. Submitted to the Naval
 Submarine Base, United States Department of the Navy,
 Kings Bay, Georgia.

 Samford, Patricia

 1991 Archaeological Investigations of a Probable Slave
 Quarter at Rich Neck Plantation. Colonial Williamsburg
 Archaeological Reports. Copies available from the Depart
 ment of Archaeological Research, The Colonial Williams
 burg Foundation, Williamsburg, Virginia.

 1996 The Archaeology of African-American Slavery and
 Material Culture. William and Mary Quarterly
 LIII(1):87-114

 1999 "Strong is the Bond of Kinship": West African-Style
 Ancestor Shrines and Subfloor Pits on African-American

 Quarters. In Historical Archaeology, Identity Formation,
 and the Interpretation of Ethnicity, edited by Maria
 Franklin and Garrett Fesler, pp. 71 -91. Colonial Williams
 burg Foundation Research Publications, Virginia.

 2004 Engendering Enslaved Communities on Virginia's
 and North Carolina's Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century
 Plantations. In Engendering African American Archaeol
 ogy, edited by Jillian E. Galle and Amy L. Young, pp.
 151-175. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

 Sanford, Douglas W.

 1994 The Archaeology of Plantation Slavery in Piedmont
 Virginia: Context and Process. In Historical Archaeology
 of the Chesapeake, edited by Paul A. Shackel and Barbara
 J. Little, pp. 115-130. Smithsonian Institution Press, Wash
 ington, D.C.

 Scarry, C. Margaret, and Elizabeth J. Reitz

 1990 Herbs, Fish, Scum and Vermin: Subsistence Strate

 gies in Sixteenth-Century Spanish Florida. In Columbian
 Consequences, Vol. 2, Archaeological and Historical Per
 spectives on the Spanish Borderlands East, edited by David
 H. Thomas, pp. 343-354. Smithsonian Institution Press,

 1996 Who Ate What? Archaeological Food Remains and
 Cultural Diversity. In Case Studies in Environmental
 Archaeology, edited by Elizabeth J. Reitz, Lee A. New
 som, and Sylvia J. Scudder, pp. 339-359. Plenum Press,
 New York.
 Seidel, John L.

 1991 "China-Glaze" Wares On Sites Before the American

 Revolution: Pearlware Before Wedgwood? Historical
 Archaeology 2(l):82-95.

 Shackel,PaulA.

 1996 Culture Change and the New Technology: An Archae
 ology of the Early American Industrial Era. Plenum Press,
 New York.

 Shepperson, Archibald Boiling

 1942 John Paradise and Lucy Ludwell of London and
 Williamsburg. The Dietz Press, Richmond, Virginia.

 Smith, James Lindsay

 2001 [1881] Autobiography of James L. Smith, Including,

 Also, Reminiscences of Slave Life, Recollections of the
 War, Education of Freedmen, Causes of the Exodus, etc.
 The Bulletin, Norwich, Connecticut. Electronic document,

 http://docsouth.unc.edu/neh/smithj/smithj.html, accessed
 February 29, 2004 Documenting the American South,
 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Libraries.

 Sobel, Mechal

 1987 The World They Made Together: Black and White Val

 ues in Eighteenth-Century Virginia. Princeton University
 Press, Princeton.
 Spencer-Wood, Suzanne

 2004 What Difference Does Feminist Theory Make in
 Researching Households? A Commentary. In Household
 Chores and Household Choices: Theorizing the Domes
 tic Sphere in Historical Archaeology, edited by Kerri S.
 Barile and Jamie C. Brandon, pp. 235-253. University of
 Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

 Stevenson, Brenda E.

 1996 Gender Convention, Ideals, and Identity Among Ante
 bellum Virginia Slave Women. In More than Chattel: Black
 Women and Slavery in the Americas, edited by David B.
 Gaspar and Darlene C. Hine, pp. 169-190. Indiana Uni
 versity Press, Bloomington.

 Stiverson, Gregory A., and Patrick H. Butler III (editors)

 1977 Virginia in 1732: The Travel Journal of William Hugh
 Grove. The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography,
 85:18^4.
 Trigg, Heather

 2004 Food Choice and Social Identity in Early Colonial
 New Mexico. Journal of the Southwest 46(2):223-252.

 Trouillot, Michel-Rolph

 1992 The Caribbean Region: An Open Frontier in Anthro
 pological Theory. Annual Review of Anthropology
 21:19-42.

 Tuma, Michael W.

 2006 Ethnoarchaeology of Subsistence Behaviors within a
 Rural African American Community: Implications for
 Interpreting Vertebrate Faunal Data from Slave Quarters
 Areas of Antebellum Plantation Sites. Historical Archae
 ology 40(4): 1-26.
 University of British Columbia

 2003 Department of Botany Website, University of British
 Columbia, Vancouver. Electronic document, http://
 www.botany.ubc.ca/arboretum/UBC080.HTM, accessed
 November 1,2003.

 Virginia Magazine of History and Biography (VMHB)

 1913 Appraisement of the Estate of Philip Ludwell Esqr

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
 728 AMERICAN ANTIQUITY [Vol. 73, No. 4,2008]

 Deed. Virginia Magazine of History and Biography
 XXI(1):395-416.

 Wilk, and Eric J. Arnould, pp. 1-28. University of Cali
 fornia Press, Berkeley.

 Vlach, John Michael

 Wilk, Richard R., and William Rathje

 1993 Back of the Big House: The Architecture of Planta
 tion Slavery. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel
 Hill.
 Walsh, Lorena S.

 1982 Household Archaeology. InArchaeology of the House

 hold: Building a Prehistory of Domestic Life, edited by
 Richard Wilk and William Rathje. American Behavioral
 Scientist 25(6):617-640.

 1993 Slave Life, Slave Society, and Tobacco Production in
 the Tidewater Chesapeake, 1620-1820. In Cultivation and
 Culture, edited by Ira Berlin and Phillip D. Morgan, pp.
 170-199. University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville.
 1997 From Calabar to Carter's Grove: The History of a Vir
 ginia Slave Community. University Press of Virginia, Char
 lottesville.

 Walsh, Lorena S., Ann S. Martin, and Joanne Bowen

 1997 Provisioning Early American Towns: The Chesa
 peake: A Multidisciplinary Case Study. National Endow
 ment for the Humanities Grant RO-22643-93. The Colonial

 Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, Virginia.

 Westmacott, Richard

 Wilkie, Laurie A.

 1996 Medicinal Teas and Patent Medicines: African
 American Women's Consumer Choices and Ethnomedical
 Traditions at a Louisiana Plantation. Southeastern Archae
 ology 15(2):119-131.

 2000 Creating Freedom: Material Culture and African
 American Identity at Oakley Plantation, 1840-1950.
 Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge.

 2003 The Archaeology of Mothering: An African-American

 Midwife's Tale. Routledge, New York.

 Work Projects Administration (WPA)

 1994 The Negro in Virginia. John F. Blair, Winston-Salem,
 North Carolina.

 1992 African-American Gardens and Yards in the Rural

 Yanagisako, Sylvia J.

 South. University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

 White, Deborah G.

 1979 Family and Household: The Analysis of Domestic

 Groups. Annual Reviews of Anthropology 8:161-205.

 1991 Female Slaves in the Plantation South. In Before Free
 dom Came: African-American Life in the Antebellum
 South, edited by Edward D. C. Campbell and Kym S. Rice,
 pp. 101-121. The Museum of the Confederacy and the Uni
 versity Press of Virginia, Richmond.

 1999 Ar'n't I a Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation

 Yentsch, Anne E.

 1994 A Chesapeake Family and Their Slaves. Cambridge

 University Press, Cambridge.

 Yetman, Norman R.

 1970 Life Under the Peculiar Institution. Holt, Reinhart, and
 Winston, New York.

 South. Revised ed. W. W. Norton, New York.

 Young, Amy L., Michael Tuma, and Cliff Jenkins

 Wilk, Richard R., and Wendy Ashmore (editors)

 1988 Household and Community in the Mesoamerican Past.

 University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

 Wilk, Richard R., and Robert M. Netting

 1984 Households: Changing Forms and Functions. In
 Households: Comparative and Historical Studies of the
 Domestic Group, edited by Robert M. Netting, Richard R.

 2001 The Role of Hunting to Cope with Risk at Saragossa
 Plantation, Natchez, Mississippi. American Anthropologist
 103(3):692-704.

 Received March 23, 2004; Revised May 30, 2007; Accepted
 March 1, 2008.

This content downloaded from 
(cid:0)108.18.142.78 on Tue, 22 Apr 2025 12:14:47 UTC(cid:0)

(cid:0) 

All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

(cid:0)
