\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

\subsection{Historical Context \&
Motivation}\label{historical-context-motivation}

Virginia's colonial land patents are a cornerstone resource for scholars
studying settlement patterns, the political economy of plantation
agriculture, and Indigenous dispossession in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. Yet the spatial dimension of these sources remains
under-exploited: most patents survive only as narrative metes-and-bounds
descriptions in printed abstract volumes such as \emph{Cavaliers and
Pioneers} (C\&P) \citep{Nugent1979_cavaliers3}. Without geographic
coordinates, historians and archaeologists cannot readily visualise how
land ownership evolved or test hypotheses with modern Geographic
Information System (GIS) tools. Creating a machine-readable,
georeferenced version of C\&P would unlock new quantitative approaches
to long-standing questions about colonial Virginia's social and
environmental history.

Digitising and geo-locating the abstracts, however, is notoriously
labour-intensive. Even professional GIS analysts can spend several hours
per grant reconciling archaic place-names, inconsistent spellings, and
low-resolution boundary calls. Recent breakthroughs in large language
models (LLMs) suggest a new pathway: language-driven spatial reasoning
where a model reads the patent text and predicts latitude/longitude
directly or with minimal tool assistance. This study explores whether
state-of-the-art LLMs can shoulder that burden accurately and cheaply
enough to matter for digital history.

\subsection{Problem Statement}\label{problem-statement}

Despite the promise of LLMs, their ability to extract usable coordinates
from early-modern archival prose had not been systematically evaluated
prior to this work. Key uncertainties I addressed included:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Could a model trained mostly on contemporary text understand
  seventeenth-century toponyms and bearing conventions?\\
\item
  Would providing API-based tools (e.g., Google Places search)
  materially improve accuracy relative to a pure text approach?\\
\item
  How did model predictions compare to the professional GIS benchmark in
  both error and cost?
\end{itemize}

Addressing these questions required a rigorously annotated test bench
that blended historical sources, modern GIS ground truth, and controlled
prompt engineering.

\subsection{Contributions}\label{contributions}

This study makes four principal contributions:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  I release the first machine-readable edition of \emph{Cavaliers and
  Pioneers}, Vol. 3 \citep{Nugent1979_cavaliers3}, comprising 5,471
  fully transcribed patent abstracts.\\
\item
  For forty-five of 125 randomly sampled patents I derive authoritative
  latitude/longitude pairs from state-archived GIS polygons and other
  archival sources, providing a high-fidelity evaluation target.\\
\item
  I evaluate two prompting paradigms---single-prompt
  ``direct-to-coordinate'' inference and tool-augmented chain-of-thought
  reasoning---across six contemporary OpenAI model variants.\\
\item
  I quantify the trade-offs among spatial error, monetary expense, and
  processing time, demonstrating that a pure LLM pipeline can match or
  surpass professional GIS accuracy while operating orders of magnitude
  faster and cheaper.
\end{enumerate}

All data, code, and results are available in my public repository:
\url{https://github.com/ryanmio/colonial-virginia-llm-geolocation}.

\section{Background \& Related Work}\label{background-related-work}

\subsection{Historical GIS and Land-Grant
Mapping}\label{historical-gis-and-land-grant-mapping}

Digitizing colonial-era land grants has long promised new insights into
European settlement patterns, Indigenous land displacement, and the
development of local economies. However, this potential has been
constrained by the extensive manual labor required to convert
metes-and-bounds descriptions into spatial data. Traditional approaches
to georeferencing these historical records have proven prohibitively
time-consuming - a genealogical case study by Julian and Abbitt
\citep{Julian2014_tennessee} required nearly ten years of archival
sleuthing and three university-semester GIS projects to pinpoint a
single family's land claims across three Tennessee counties.

Several institutional efforts have attempted to address these
challenges, though coverage remains incomplete. The Library of Virginia
maintains a statewide \emph{Land Patents and Grants} online database
hosting scanned images and searchable indices for every recorded patent
(1623--1774) and subsequent grant (1779--2000), including Northern Neck
surveys, but provides no ready-made GIS polygons, limiting its direct
utility for spatial analysis \citep{lva_patents_db}. Similarly, the
Virginia Surveyor's Office has released thousands of patent polygons for
central regions of the colony, while Loudoun County GIS staff have
successfully reconstructed all original grants within their jurisdiction
\citep{loudoun_grants_dataset}. These initiatives demonstrate the
feasibility of digitizing historical land records but also highlight
significant gaps in existing datasets - many seventeenth- and
eighteenth-century patents, particularly those recorded in Cavaliers and
Pioneers \citep{Nugent1979_cavaliers3}, still lack spatial coordinates.

Among the most thorough academic efforts for Virginia's Northern Neck
proprietary are Mitchell's \citep{mitchell1977whiteoak} maps and
companion text documenting the ``Beginning at a White Oak'' patents of
Fairfax County. This work reconstructed hundreds of early land grants
with polygonal boundaries, establishing both the feasibility and
research value of transforming metes-and-bounds descriptions into
spatial data. Building on such foundations, scholars have leveraged
available georeferenced grants for substantive historical analysis. In
Virginia, seminal studies like Fausz \citep{Fausz1971_settlement}
utilized narrative patent abstracts to trace settlement patterns along
the James River basin, while noting the persistent challenges of
transforming textual descriptions into precise spatial coordinates for
quantitative analysis.

This analytical potential extends beyond Virginia. Dobbs
\citep{Dobbs2009_backcountry} used georeferenced North Carolina grants
to demonstrate that eighteenth-century town sites often followed
pre-existing Indigenous trails, while Coughlan and Nelson
\citep{Coughlan2018_settlement} leveraged a dataset of 1,160 South
Carolina grants to model settlement patterns based on river access and
soil fertility. In each case, spatial enablement of historical records
revealed patterns difficult to discern through textual sources alone.

In genealogical and historical research communities, semi-automated
solutions have emerged to assist with this labor-intensive process.
DeedMapper software \citep{DeedMapper_software} helps researchers
convert metes-and-bounds descriptions into visual plots, though it still
requires manual entry of deed text and expert positioning of parcels on
reference maps. Professional development courses from the Salt Lake
Institute of Genealogy (SLIG) continue to teach these specialized
mapping techniques, reflecting the still-developing state of automation
in this field.

The literature establishes three critical facts. First, historians value
land-grant GIS layers because they unlock settlement and landscape
questions that text alone cannot answer. Second, traditional platting
methods are too slow and too localized to deliver colony-scale coverage.
Third, the piecemeal datasets that do exist furnish both ground truth
and a methodological benchmark for any attempt at automation. This study
addresses this bottleneck by testing whether large language models can
shoulder the coordinate-extraction burden---potentially transforming
Virginia's colonial patents from archival prose to research-ready GIS at
scale.

\subsection{Large Language Models for
Geolocation}\label{large-language-models-for-geolocation}

Building on the manual coordinate-extraction bottleneck outlined in ยง
2.1, recent advances in large language models (LLMs) suggest that much
of the geoparsing pipeline can now be automated. \textbf{Coordinate
extraction}---sometimes called \emph{geoparsing}---comprises two
subtasks: (i) identifying candidate toponyms in running text and (ii)
resolving each mention to a unique set of latitude/longitude
coordinates.

The evolution of this field has moved through several distinct
methodological phases. Rule-based gazetteer look-ups dominated early
work, providing limited accuracy when dealing with ambiguous place
names. Neural architectures such as CamCoder \citep{Gritta2018_camcoder}
subsequently improved performance through learned contextual
representations. Most recently, fine-tuned large language models have
demonstrated substantial breakthroughs in toponym resolution accuracy.

A representative example of this latest approach comes from Hu et al.
\citep{Hu2024_toponym_llm}, who adapted 7--13 billion-parameter
open-source models (e.g., Mistral-7B, Llama 2-7B) to generate an
unambiguous administrative string for each toponym before invoking a
standard geocoding API. Their fine-tuned Mistral-7B achieved an
\textbf{Accuracy@161 km of 0.91}, outperforming previous neural methods
by multiple percentage points and improving toponym resolution accuracy
by 13\%; on the less ambiguous WikToR corpus the same architecture
reached 0.98. Crucially, these gains were realized on commodity
hardware, underscoring the practicality of parameter-efficient
fine-tuning for large corpora.

Addressing the persistent challenge of annotation scarcity, Wu et al.
\citep{wu2025geosg} introduced \textbf{GeoSG}, a self-supervised graph
neural network that learns spatial semantics from Point-of-Interest
(POI)--text relationships. This approach predicts document coordinates
without any annotated training samples, nearly matching supervised
baselines on two urban benchmarks. In a similar vein, Savarro et al.
\citep{savarro2024geolingit} demonstrated that Italian tweets can be
geolocated to both regional and point coordinates by fine-tuning
decoder-only LLMs on the GeoLingIt shared task, further confirming that
pretrained language models can internalize subtle linguistic cues of
place.

Despite these advances, significant limitations remain. O'Sullivan et
al. \citep{Osullivan2024_metric} demonstrated that GPT-class models
mis-calibrate qualitative distance terms: \emph{near} in a neighborhood
scenario is treated similarly to \emph{near} at continental scale,
revealing a lack of geometric grounding. Such biases caution against
``out-of-the-box'' deployment for precision geolocation, especially when
dealing with archaic toponyms or surveyor jargon. Even the most advanced
automated systems leave a long tail of ambiguous or obsolete place
names---precisely the cases that plague colonial patent abstracts.

In summary, fine-tuned LLMs now surpass previous neural approaches on
toponym resolution and can support colony-scale spatial inference, yet
their reasoning remains sensitive to context and scale. The next section
(ยง 2.3) explores tool-augmented prompting frameworks that grant LLMs
access to external geocoders and vector databases---potentially
mitigating some of the failure modes identified above.

\subsection{Tool-Augmented Prompting
Techniques}\label{tool-augmented-prompting-techniques}

Integrating large language models with external geospatial utilities has
emerged as a promising way to address the limitations identified in ยง
2.2. In a \emph{tool-augmented} workflow, the LLM interprets
unstructured language but can invoke specialized geocoding, database, or
cartographic services during its reasoning process, grounding its
outputs in authoritative data and deterministic algorithms.

This hybrid approach has evolved through several distinct
implementations, each targeting different aspects of the geolocation
challenge. Early evidence for its effectiveness comes from Hu et al.
\citep{Hu2024_toponym_llm}, who coupled a fine-tuned Mistral-7B with a
cascading trio of geocoders---GeoNames, Nominatim, and ArcGIS---to
resolve toponyms the model had already disambiguated linguistically.
Their experiments demonstrated that this hybrid pipeline raised
Accuracy@161 km by 7--17 percentage points relative to either component
used in isolation.

Extending this concept to more complex natural language descriptions,
Huang et al. \citep{Huang2024_geoagent} developed \textbf{GeoAgent} for
free-form address normalization. This system enables the LLM to convert
colloquial descriptions (e.g., ``two blocks east of the old
courthouse'') into structured cues, orchestrate vector-database lookups
and offset calculations, and then retrieve precise coordinates from
mapping APIs. Their ablation study confirmed that this agentic variant
outperforms both rule-based and LLM-only baselines on two public
address-standardization benchmarks.

These specialized implementations build upon a more general design
pattern known as the \textbf{ReAct} prompting paradigm
\citep{yao2023react}, which demonstrates how language models can
interleave chain-of-thought reasoning with live tool calls. This
approach has proven particularly effective for spatial tasks that
require both linguistic understanding and computational precision.

At enterprise scale, Google Research's \emph{Geospatial Reasoning}
initiative \citep{GoogleResearch2025_geospatial} exemplifies the
integration of foundation models with Earth Engine, BigQuery, and Maps
Platform. This system enables agentic LLMs to chain satellite imagery,
socioeconomic layers, and routing services to answer compound spatial
queries in seconds---a capability relevant to both consumer applications
and research contexts.

Across these diverse implementations, a consistent finding emerges:
granting an LLM controlled access to trusted GIS services reduces
hallucination, improves numerical accuracy, and broadens task coverage
(Hu et al. \citep{Hu2024_toponym_llm}; Huang et al.
\citep{Huang2024_geoagent}). The present work builds on this pattern by
testing whether a similar benefit materializes for colonial land-grant
geolocation---comparing a pure one-shot prompt to a tool-augmented
chain-of-thought that can issue mid-prompt geocoding and
distance-calculation calls while processing historical texts with
archaic toponyms and surveying terminology.

\section{Data}\label{data}

\subsection{Corpus Overview}\label{corpus-overview}

\emph{Cavaliers and Pioneers}, Volume 3 \citep{Nugent1979_cavaliers3},
compiles 5,471 abstracts of Virginia land patents recorded in patent
books 9--14 (1695--1732). These grants fall largely in central and
south-central Virginia, clustering around the present-day Richmond area.
After an extensive search I found no publicly available digital
transcription of this volume and therefore treat the material as unseen
by contemporary language models, though I did not perform a formal check
of training-data leakage.

\subsection{Pre-processing Pipeline}\label{pre-processing-pipeline}

To prepare the corpus for analysis, the source volume was destructively
scanned page-by-page. Multiple optical-character-recognition (OCR)
configurations were trialled to maximise fidelity; the optimal workflow
was then applied to all pages. Extracted text was normalised and
exported as a CSV with one row per patent abstract, yielding a complete
corpus of 5,471 land grant abstracts.

From this full corpus, I generated three random subsets using
reproducible seeds:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Dev-1} and \textbf{Dev-2} -- 20 abstracts each, reserved for
  prompt engineering and method tuning.
\item
  \textbf{Test} -- 125 abstracts, mutually exclusive from the dev sets.
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Ground-Truth \& Baseline
Coordinates}\label{ground-truth-baseline-coordinates}

Of the 125 test abstracts, 45 were deemed ``locatable'' and assigned
authoritative latitude/longitude pairs. I established ground-truth
coordinates through a rigorous two-step verification process:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Primary method: When a grant matched a polygon in the Central VA
  Patents GIS layer published by the Office of the Surveyor (matching by
  grantee name, year, and acreage), I used the centroid of the GIS
  polygon as the authoritative coordinate.
\item
  Secondary method: For grants without a matching GIS polygon, I relied
  on published historical maps and archival sources. If the grant could
  be confidently located on these maps and aligned with modern
  coordinates, I assigned a ground-truth point and cited the source in
  my bibliography.
\end{enumerate}

The 36\% locatability rate reflects an important methodological choice.
I deliberately avoided expanding the ground-truth set beyond what could
be authoritatively established through rigorous archival criteria to
prevent convenience bias---a larger sample would disproportionately
include easier-to-locate grants, thereby understating the difficulty of
the general task. Each authoritative coordinate determination required
substantial curatorial effort (1--3 hours of expert research per grant),
making exhaustive ground-truthing impractical while maintaining
methodological integrity. This sample size provides sufficient
statistical power for the comparative analysis while preserving
ecological validity.

To establish a professional benchmark, a GIS contractor independently
geolocated 50 patents using traditional methods; their coordinates are
stored alongside the test set and serve as a human-expert baseline for
my experiments.

For each model--tool configuration, the evaluation script iterates over
the test abstracts, records any tool calls invoked by the LLM, and
measures great-circle error against the 45 ground-truth points.

\section{Methods}\label{methods}

\subsection{Professional GIS Benchmark
(H-1)}\label{professional-gis-benchmark-h-1}

A certified GIS analyst \citep{Bashorun2025_gis} implemented an
automated geolocating procedure leveraging standard geospatial libraries
and toolsets. The workflow ingested the patent texts, tokenized
toponyms, and queried a multi-layered gazetteer stack (including ArcGIS
Online resources, historical overlays, and place-name databases) to
generate the highest-confidence coordinate for each grant. Development,
parameter tuning, and execution required approximately six billable
hours for 50 grants. I treat this end-to-end process---including both
script development and execution---as the benchmark cost to maintain
fair comparison with LLM methodologies that likewise combine design and
inference phases.

These baseline coordinates are stored directly in the evaluation file,
allowing the experiment script to access them through the static
pipeline. A labor cost of USD 140 (six billable hours) is assigned to
the benchmark when reporting cost metrics.

\subsection{One-shot Prompting
(M-series)}\label{one-shot-prompting-m-series}

In the first automatic condition, the language model receives the grant
abstract together with a single exemplar response illustrating the
desired output format. The prompt asks for coordinates expressed in
degrees--minutes--seconds (DMS) and contains no chain-of-thought or tool
instructions:

\begin{lstlisting}
Geolocate this colonial Virginia land grant to precise latitude and longitude coordinates.
Respond with ONLY the coordinates in this format: [DD]ยฐ[MM]'[SS].[SSSSS]"N [DDD]ยฐ[MM]'[SS].[SSSSS]"W
\end{lstlisting}

Six OpenAI model variants spanning three architecture families
constitute the M-series (\ref{tbl:mmodels}). Temperature is fixed at 0.2
for GPT-4 and GPT-4o; all other parameters remain at their service
defaults. Each abstract is processed with a single API call; no external
tools are available in this condition.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lll@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:mmodels}One-shot model variants
(M-series).}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
ID & Model & Description \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
ID & Model & Description \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
M-1 & \passthrough{\lstinline!o4-mini-2025-04-16!} & One-shot,
4o-mini \\
M-2 & \passthrough{\lstinline!o3-2025-04-16!} & One-shot, o3 base \\
M-3 & \passthrough{\lstinline!o3-mini-2025-01-31!} & One-shot,
o3-mini \\
M-4 & \passthrough{\lstinline!gpt-4.1-2025-04-14!} & One-shot,
GPT-4.1 \\
M-5 & \passthrough{\lstinline!gpt-4o-2024-08-06!} & One-shot, GPT-4o \\
M-6 & \passthrough{\lstinline!gpt-3.5-turbo!} & One-shot, GPT-3.5 \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{Tool-augmented Chain-of-Thought
(T-series)}\label{tool-augmented-chain-of-thought-t-series}

The second automated condition equips the model with two specialized
tools: \passthrough{\lstinline!geocode\_place!}, an interface to the
Google Geocoding API limited to Virginia and adjoining counties, and
\passthrough{\lstinline!compute\_centroid!}, which returns the spherical
centroid of two or more points. The system prompt (Appendix A.2.2)
encourages an iterative search strategy where the model can issue up to
twelve tool calls, evaluate the plausibility of each result, and
optionally average multiple anchors before emitting a final answer in
decimal degrees with six fractional places.

Table \ref{tbl:tmodels} summarizes the five model variants initially
considered for this tool suite. Of these, only T-1 and T-4 were carried
forward into the final evaluation. The remaining models---T-2 (o3), T-3
(o3-mini), and T-5 (computer-vision preview)---were excluded after
developmental testing. This testing revealed that these models,
including the o3 variant (the top performer in one-shot evaluations),
produced outputs largely identical to the more economical T-1 when using
the tool-augmented pipeline. Given that the primary tool, Google's
Geocoding API, is deterministic, proceeding with these additional models
would have substantially increased computational costs and processing
times without yielding distinct results or further insights into
tool-augmented performance.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 4\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0976}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 4\tabcolsep) * \real{0.4878}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 4\tabcolsep) * \real{0.4146}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:tmodels}Tool-augmented model variants
(T-series).}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ID
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Description
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ID
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Description
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
T-1 & \passthrough{\lstinline!o4-mini-2025-04-16!} & Tool-chain,
4o-mini \\
T-2 & \passthrough{\lstinline!o3-2025-04-16!} & Tool-chain, o3 \\
T-3 & \passthrough{\lstinline!o3-mini-2025-01-31!} & Tool-chain,
o3-mini \\
T-4 & \passthrough{\lstinline!gpt-4.1-2025-04-14!} & Tool-chain,
GPT-4.1 \\
T-5 & \passthrough{\lstinline!computer-use-preview-2025-03-11!} &
Tool-chain, computer-vision preview \\
\end{longtable}

The experiment driver loops over each abstract, maintains a conversation
history including tool call outputs, and stops after either receiving a
valid coordinate string or exceeding ten assistant turns.

\subsection{Cost and Latency
Accounting}\label{cost-and-latency-accounting}

For each automated prediction, I convert the input and output tokens
reported by the OpenAI API to U.S. dollars using the price list in
effect on 15 May 2025. The per-call cost is calculated as:

\[
\text{Cost} = \frac{\text{input tokens}}{10^{6}} \times p_{\text{in}} + \frac{\text{output tokens}}{10^{6}} \times p_{\text{out}}
\]

where \(p_{\text{in}}\) and \(p_{\text{out}}\) are USD prices per
million tokens. Google Geocoding calls remain comfortably within the
free-tier quota and therefore do not accrue additional fees.

Latency is measured as wall-clock time from submission of an API request
until a valid coordinate string is returned, inclusive of all
intermediate tool interactions. For the traditional GIS benchmark, I
divide the analyst's total working time (6 h) by the number of grants
processed, yielding an average latency of 432 s per prediction.

\section{Experimental Setup}\label{experimental-setup}

\subsection{Evaluation Metrics}\label{evaluation-metrics}

The primary outcome measure is \textbf{distance error}---the
great-circle distance in kilometres between predicted and reference
coordinates, computed with the Haversine formula. I report the mean,
median, and 95\% bootstrap confidence intervals, along with accuracy
bands (\textless1 km, 1--10 km, \textgreater10 km) and the proportion of
entries for which a valid coordinate was produced (success rate).

Efficiency is characterized by two key metrics:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Latency}: Measured as mean labor time per grant (forward-pass
  time once the workflow is in place)
\item
  \textbf{Monetary cost}: Calculated by multiplying input and output
  token counts returned by the OpenAI API by the official per-token
  prices in effect on 01 May 2025
\end{enumerate}

The GIS benchmark incurred a fixed fee of USD 140 for approximately 6
billable hours processing 50 grants (โ432 s per grant).\footnote{The
  actual script execution time for the GIS workflow is negligible
  (\textless1 s per grant) relative to analyst labor for development and
  quality assurance, and is therefore excluded from latency comparisons
  to maintain consistent measurement of reasoning/computation time
  across all methods.} For LLM methods, latency represents wall-clock
time from API request to final coordinate string, inclusive of all tool
interactions.

All metrics are computed on the 45 test-set abstracts for which
ground-truth coordinates are available; remaining rows are retained in
the public logs but excluded from aggregate statistics.

\subsection{Implementation Protocol}\label{implementation-protocol}

I began by partitioning the full corpus (5,471 abstracts) into
development (20\%) and test (80\%) segments using seed 42. From these
segments, I drew fixed-size random samples: two development sets of 20
abstracts each for prompt engineering and parameter tuning, and a
held-out test set of 125 abstracts that remained unseen during
development.

Ground-truth coordinates were appended to the test file following the
methodology described in Section 3.3. The traditional GIS baseline and
all automated predictions were subsequently written to the same tabular
structure, ensuring uniform error computation across methods.

For each method listed in Table 4, an evaluation driver sequentially
processed the 45 abstracts, invoking the OpenAI \emph{Responses} API
under stable April-2025 model versions. Tool-chain variants interacted
with the Google Geocoding API and an in-process centroid function
exposed via JSON-Schema. Token usage, latency, and any tool traces were
logged in real time; intermediate artifacts and final result sets are
archived in the accompanying repository.

\section{Results}\label{results}

\subsection{Accuracy}\label{accuracy}

Figure \ref{fig:accuracy_bar} displays the mean error with corresponding
95\% confidence intervals.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/accuracy_bar.pdf}
\caption{Coordinate accuracy by method}\label{fig:accuracy_bar}
\end{figure}

Table \ref{tbl:accuracy} summarizes the per-method distance-error
statistics on the 45-item test set (43 located rows per method). The
best-performing automatic approach, \textbf{M-2} (o3-2025-04-16,
one-shot prompt), achieved a mean error of \textbf{23.4 km}---a 67\%
improvement over the professional GIS benchmark (\textbf{H-1}, 71.4 km).
Approximately one-third of M-2 predictions fell within 10 km of
ground-truth, compared with less than 5\% for the GIS script.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1250}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1250}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1250}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1250}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:accuracy}Coordinate-accuracy
metrics.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ID
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Underlying model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean ยฑ 95\% CI (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km (\%)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Success (\%)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ID
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Underlying model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean ยฑ 95\% CI (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km (\%)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Success (\%)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
M-2 & o3-2025-04-16 & 23.4 {[}17.8, 29.7{]} & 14.3 & 30.2 & 95.6 \\
M-5 & gpt-4o-2024-08-06 & 27.9 {[}22.2, 34.1{]} & 25.0 & 16.3 & 95.6 \\
M-4 & gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & 28.5 {[}22.9, 35.0{]} & 25.4 & 20.9 & 95.6 \\
T-4 & gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 + tools & 37.2 {[}29.9, 44.4{]} & 34.2 & 16.3 &
95.6 \\
T-1 & o4-mini-2025-04-16 + tools & 37.7 {[}30.9, 45.0{]} & 33.6 & 14.0 &
95.6 \\
H-1 & Professional GIS script & 71.4 {[}57.9, 85.9{]} & 70.7 & 4.7 &
95.6 \\
\end{longtable}

The violin plot in Figure \ref{fig:violin} shows that most LLM errors
cluster below 40 km, with a long tail driven by a handful of outliers.
The GIS script exhibits a bimodal pattern---either fairly close or
\textgreater100 km off---reflecting the all-or-nothing nature of
gazetteer-based geocoding when dealing with historical place names.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/error_violin_methods.pdf}
\caption{Error Distribution by Method}\label{fig:violin}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/cdf_graphs/cdf_models_combined.pdf}
\caption{Cumulative error distribution by method}\label{fig:cdf_models}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:cdf_models} presents the cumulative distribution of
errors for each evaluated method.

Table \ref{tbl:reasoning} examines how varying the
\emph{reasoning\_effort} parameter within the same o3 model (M-2)
affects spatial accuracy. The differences are minor: mean error shifts
by less than 1 km across effort levels, while the share of
highly-accurate predictions (โค 10 km) increases by approximately 7
percentage points from low to medium/high effort.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2105}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 10\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:reasoning}Effect of reasoning-effort budget on o3
one-shot accuracy (n = 45).}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ID
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Underlying model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km (\%)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Tokens / entry
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ID
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Underlying model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km (\%)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Tokens / entry
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
M2-low & o3-2025-04-16, low effort & 24.8 & 15.9 & 28.9 & 1.1 k \\
M2-med & o3-2025-04-16, medium effort & 24.9 & 15.1 & 35.6 & 3.2 k \\
M2-high & o3-2025-04-16, high effort & 23.8 & 15.0 & 35.6 & 7.0 k \\
\end{longtable}

Three key observations emerge: (1) modern LLMs can match or exceed a
trained GIS specialist on this task, (2) supplementing GPT-4.1 with
explicit Google-Maps queries \textbf{did not} improve accuracy---in
fact, the tool-chain variant T-4 performed 30 \% worse than its
pure-prompt counterpart, and (3) the amount of chain-of-thought the o3
model is allowed to emit has only a marginal effect on accuracy.

\clearpage

\subsection{Cost--Accuracy Trade-off}\label{costaccuracy-trade-off}

I next examine the relationship between monetary cost and spatial
accuracy. Figure \ref{fig:pareto_cost} positions every method on this
plane. All automated variants dominate the GIS script baseline by two to
five orders of magnitude on both dimensions. \textbf{GPT-4o} (M-5)
delivers the best \emph{dollar-for-accuracy} ratio: \textbf{USD 1.09 per
1,000 successfully located grants} at a mean error under 28 km.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}llll@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:cost}Cost efficiency of evaluated
methods.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
ID & Cost / located (USD) & Cost per 1k & Mean error (km) \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
ID & Cost / located (USD) & Cost per 1k & Mean error (km) \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
M-4 & 0.00048 & 0.48 & 28.5 \\
M-5 & 0.00109 & 1.09 & 27.9 \\
M-2 & 0.13744 & 137.44 & 23.4 \\
H-1 & 3.25581 & 3,255.81 & 71.4 \\
\end{longtable}

Figure \ref{fig:pareto_cost} plots the relationship between monetary
cost (per 1,000 grants processed) and accuracy (mean error in
kilometers) for each method. The professional GIS baseline appears in
the upper-right quadrant, reflecting its combination of high cost and
relatively high error. All automated methods establish a clear Pareto
frontier along the bottom edge of the plot, with GPT-4o offering the
most favorable cost-to-accuracy ratio despite not achieving the absolute
lowest error.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/pareto_tradeoff.pdf}
\caption{Cost-Accuracy Tradeoff}\label{fig:pareto_cost}
\end{figure}

The o3-2025-04-16 model (M-2) is more accurate but \textasciitilde100ร
costlier than GPT-4o. Users can therefore choose a point on the Pareto
frontier that best balances budget and precision.

\subsection{Latency--Accuracy
Trade-off}\label{latencyaccuracy-trade-off}

Examining the latency dimension, Figure \ref{fig:pareto_latency} shows
that automatic methods produce coordinates in \textbf{0.7--48 seconds}
of computation time, still three orders of magnitude faster than the GIS
analyst's labor time (โ432 s per grant). This range reflects substantial
variation across model families, with the fastest models
(chatgpt-4o-latest and gpt-3.5-turbo) requiring less than 1 second per
grant, while the Claude-family models (particularly o3-2025-04-16)
taking up to 48 seconds.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics[width=0.75\linewidth]{figures/latency_boxplot.pdf}
\caption{Distribution of per-grant latency by method.}
\label{fig:latency_box}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Qualitative Examples}\label{qualitative-examples}

To illustrate how the two prompting paradigms differ, I distill the
chain of thought for test\_entry\_04 into key stages. Table 4 shows
these steps for the tool-chain (T-2) and one-shot (M-2) methods.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 4\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2039}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 4\tabcolsep) * \real{0.5146}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 4\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2816}}@{}}
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Stage
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Tool-Chain (T-2)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
One-Shot (M-2)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
1. Feature ID & Holloway Branch, Blackwater Swamp & run of Holloway Sw \\
2. First lookup & geocode\_place(``H. Branch, B. Swamp\ldots{}'') โ PG
County & Mental estimate \\
3. Mismatch check & Sussex County result โ refine to ``Holloway Swamp''
& --- \\
4. Second lookup & geocode\_place(``Holloway Swamp, VA'') & --- \\
5. Anchor averaging & compute\_centroid({[}\ldots{]}) & --- \\
6. Final output & 37.166303, -77.244091 & 37ยฐ00'07.2''N 77ยฐ07'58.8''W \\
\end{longtable}

Full reasoning chains are available in Appendix A.

The \emph{one-shot} paradigm asks the model to read the abstract, reason
internally, and emit coordinates in a single response. All cognition is
``in the head'' of the network: it interprets archaic toponyms, performs
mental triangulation against its latent world map, and produces a
best-guess point estimate. By contrast, the \emph{tool-chain} paradigm
externalises part of that reasoning. The model may call a geocoder to
retrieve candidate coordinates for surface forms (e.g.~``Holloway
Swamp''), inspect the returned JSON, run additional look-ups with
spelling variants or county qualifiers, and finally aggregate anchors
with a centroid tool. Each call--observe--reflect loop is logged,
exposing an auditable chain of evidence. The trade-off is latency and
verbosity: ten turns of querying and self-reflection can be slower and,
as ยง 6.1 showed, not necessarily more accurate. Nevertheless, the traces
reveal \emph{why} the model settles on a location---useful when
historians need to vet or correct automated outputs.

\subsection{Tool-usage patterns}\label{tool-usage-patterns}

Two configurations---T-1 and T-4---were granted access to the external
function suite. Their invocation patterns are summarised in Table
\ref{tbl:tooluse}.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.3684}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:tooluse}LLM tool-chain behavior on the 45-grant test
set.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Method
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Underlying model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Calls / entry (mean)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
geo:cent ratio
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
First-call success
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Method
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Underlying model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Calls / entry (mean)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
geo:cent ratio
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
First-call success
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
T-1 & o4-mini-2025-04-16 & 3.98 & 22.86:1 & 66.7\% \\
T-4 & gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & 2.23 & 7.73:1 & 72.1\% \\
\end{longtable}

For both pipelines the Google \passthrough{\lstinline!geocode\_place!}
endpoint dominated the call mix, whereas the auxiliary
\passthrough{\lstinline!compute\_centroid!} function appeared in fewer
than one call per ten. GPT-4.1 (T-4) adopted a more economical strategy,
issuing on average 2.3 calls per grant while succeeding on the first
query in 73 \% of cases. The 4o-mini model (T-1), by contrast, averaged
4.0 calls with a 67 \% first-call success rate. This greater query
volume manifests as the higher token usage and latency reported in ยง
6.3, yet it conferred no observable advantage in positional accuracy (ยง
6.1).

\subsection{Robustness / Ablation
Studies}\label{robustness-ablation-studies}

I conducted several additional analyses to test the robustness of my
main findings:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \textbf{Outlier-robust summary} -- Excluding the five largest
  residuals (top 11\% of errors) lowers the overall mean error from 38.5
  km to 36.9 km. Method rankings and 95\% CIs remain unchanged; only
  \textbf{H-1} \citep{Bashorun2025_gis} (โ6.6 km) and \textbf{M-6} (โ6.3
  km) show material shifts, leaving \textbf{M-2} as the top performer.
\item
  \textbf{Lengthโstratified accuracy} -- To test whether verbose
  abstracts make the task easier (or harder), I measured the word-count
  of each grant's full text in the validation file and analyzed 152 LLM
  predictions:

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Median split --- ``Short'' (โค 36 words) vs ``long'' (\textgreater{}
    36 words) abstracts yielded mean errors of \textbf{36.8 km} and
    \textbf{34.9 km} respectively (95\% CIs overlap), indicating no
    practical difference.\\
  \item
    Continuous fit --- An ordinary-least-squares regression
    (\text{error}\emph{\{km\}=42.3-0.18,\text{length}}\{words\}) gives a
    slope of \textbf{--0.18 km ยฑ 0.44 km} (95\% CI) per extra word with
    \textbf{Rยฒ = 0.004} and Pearson \textbf{r = --0.06}. Figure
    \ref{fig:length-vs-error} visualizes the scatter and confidence
    band.
  \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/length_vs_error.png}
\caption{Length vs.~Error}\label{fig:length-vs-error}
\end{figure}

These results suggest that, within the 25--60-word range typical of the
corpus, abstract length explains essentially none of the variation in
LLM accuracy.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Temperature sweep} -- Four temperatures (0.0 / 0.4 / 0.8 /
  1.2) were evaluated for the one-shot prompt on GPT-4.1 (M4) and GPT-4o
  (M5). Mean error for GPT-4.1 varied narrowly between \textbf{34 km}
  (\emph{t}=0.0) and \textbf{31.7 km} (\emph{t}=0.8), indicating a
  shallow optimum around 0.8. GPT-4o showed no systematic trend (32--33
  km across the grid). Given the marginal gains, I fix \textbf{t = 0.8}
  for GPT-4.1 and keep the default \textbf{t = 0.0} for GPT-4o in all
  downstream benchmarks.
\end{itemize}

\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}

\subsection{Implications for Digital
History}\label{implications-for-digital-history}

The findings demonstrate that contemporary large language models can
match or outperform a professional GIS script on geolocating
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Virginia land grants, delivering
this accuracy at a cost previously unattainable by traditional
workflows. A mean error of โ 23.4 km (M-2) suffices to place most
patents within their correct river basin or county, enabling macro-scale
analyses of settlement diffusion, planter networks, and Indigenous
dispossession without months of archival GIS labor. Because the input to
the model is plain text, the same pipeline can be reused for later
patent volumes or for neighboring colonies whose grant abstracts share a
common rhetorical template. More broadly, the study reinforces the
premise of ``machine-assisted reading'' in the digital humanities, where
historians formulate research questions while delegating repetitive
extraction tasks to foundation models.

Nevertheless, scholars must heed the epistemic caveats that accompany
automated coordinates. Even the best LLM occasionally misplaces a grant
by \textgreater100 km, and the absence of per-prediction uncertainty
estimates complicates downstream statistical inference. I therefore
recommend a hybrid workflow in which the model provides a first-pass
coordinate that is then verified---or rejected---by a domain expert. At
โค1 s latency and \textasciitilde USD 0.001 per prediction (GPT-4o), such
assisted verification remains an order of magnitude cheaper than
start-to-finish traditional geocoding.

\subsection{Error Analysis \& Failure
Modes}\label{error-analysis-failure-modes}

Inspection of the largest residuals uncovers three recurring failure
modes:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  \textbf{Obsolete or ambiguous toponyms.} Grants that reference
  now-extinct mill sites or plantations often trigger erroneous
  Google-Maps matches to modern businesses with the same surname. This
  effect is amplified when the model fails to include a county qualifier
  in its geocoder query.
\item
  \textbf{Chain-of-bearing descriptions.} A minority of abstracts
  provide only metes-and-bounds bearings (e.g., ``beginning at a white
  oak, thence S 42ยฐ E 240 p.''). Without explicit place names, the LLM
  frequently defaults to the centroid of the target county, inflating
  error to \textgreater70 km.
\item
  \textbf{Cascading search bias.} Tool-enabled runs introduce an
  additional failure channel: once the first
  \passthrough{\lstinline!geocode\_place!} call returns a spurious
  coordinate, subsequent \passthrough{\lstinline!compute\_centroid!}
  operations often average anchors that are already flawed, locking in
  the error. Raising the threshold for calling the centroid
  function---or providing the model with a quality heuristic---may
  mitigate this issue.
\end{enumerate}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\begin{subfigure}{0.48\textwidth}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth,height=0.35\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/map_outputs/grant_1_map.png}
  \caption{Success example: Grant 1.}
  \label{fig:grant1}
\end{subfigure}
\hfill % Maximal horizontal space between subfigures
\begin{subfigure}{0.48\textwidth}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth,height=0.35\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/map_outputs/grant_19_map.png}
  \caption{Failure-mode example: Grant 19.}
  \label{fig:grant19}
\end{subfigure}
\caption{Grant examples: Grant 1 (left) shows a success case where the o3 model (M-2) and tool-chain GPT-4.1 (T-4) are close to ground truth. Grant 19 (right) illustrates a failure mode where an early spurious geocoder hit sends the tool-chain prediction far from ground truth, whereas the unguided model remains closer to the actual location. Basemap ยฉ OSM.}
\label{fig:grant_maps}
\end{figure}

In Grant 1 (LEWIS GREEN), language-only inference (M-2) achieves
county-level precision (9 km error), and the tool-chain (T-4) further
reduces the error to just 1.5 km. In Grant 19, a spurious geocoder hit
sends the tool-chain prediction far from ground truth, whereas the
unguided models remain within a reasonable distance---a pattern that
typifies the cascading search bias described above.

These examples visually reinforce my key finding that sophisticated
language models like o3 already encode substantial geographic knowledge
about Virginia's colonial landscape, often placing grants within their
correct watershed without external reference data. The full contact
sheet showing all 43 mapped grants appears in Appendix C.

\subsection{Cost--Benefit
Considerations}\label{costbenefit-considerations}

From a budgetary standpoint, all automatic methods lie on a markedly
superior frontier relative to the traditional GIS baseline: the cheapest
model (GPT-3.5) reduces cost per located grant by four orders of
magnitude, while the most accurate (o3-2025-04-16) still delivers a
\textgreater20ร saving. Latency gains are equally pronounced, shrinking
a six-hour task to seconds.

The choice of model therefore hinges on the marginal utility of
additional accuracy. If a project tolerates a 30 km error band, GPT-4o
maximizes throughput at negligible cost; archival projects requiring
sub-15 km precision may justify the higher token expenditure of the o3
family.\footnote{I also evaluated three ultra-low-cost GPT-4-class
  variants (GPT-4.1-mini, GPT-4.1-nano, GPT-4o-mini). Their outputs
  rarely conformed to the required coordinate format, yielding a mean
  error of โ 49 km; details are archived in my
  \href{https://github.com/ryanmio/colonial-virginia-llm-geolocation}{GitHub
  repository}.} Crucially, both options scale linearly with corpus size,
placing statewide geocoding---tens of thousands of patents---within
reach of modest research budgets.

My ablation runs reveal that these gains do \textbf{not} depend on
expensive parameter settings. Increasing \emph{reasoning\_effort} from
``low'' to ``high'' multiplies token usage \textasciitilde6ร and latency
\textasciitilde5ร while trimming mean error by \textless1 km. Likewise,
GPT-4.1 accuracy varies by only ยฑ1.5 km across the 0--1.2 temperature
range, and GPT-4o shows no systematic trend. In practice, therefore, the
default (cheap) settings already sit near the cost-accuracy frontier.

\section{Limitations}\label{limitations}

Several caveats temper the preceding claims.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Dataset scope.} Only 45 of the 125 test abstracts possessed
  authoritative ground-truth coordinates, and all derive from a single
  printed volume (1695-1739). While this sample is methodologically
  appropriate to prevent convenience bias (see ยง 3.3), the reported
  error statistics may under- or overstate performance on earlier or
  later patent books, or on neighbouring colonies with different
  toponymic conventions. Future work with an expanded ground-truth set
  obtained through methods that avoid selection bias will further
  validate these findings.
\item
  \textbf{OCR and transcription noise.} Although I applied the
  best-performing OCR pipeline available, minor character errors
  persist. Because the language models ingested this noisy text
  directly, a fraction of the residual error may stem from imperfect
  input rather than conceptual failure.
\item
  \textbf{Point-estimate evaluation.} I benchmarked single
  latitude/longitude pairs, ignoring shape reconstruction and parcel
  acreage. Applications that require boundary polygons will need
  supplementary modelling or manual intervention.
\item
  \textbf{Tool bias.} Google's geocoder is optimised for modern place
  names; its deterministic output may shift marginally over time as the
  underlying database updates, complicating longitudinal
  reproducibility.
\item
  \textbf{GIS benchmark generality.} The benchmark
  \citep{Bashorun2025_gis} relies on a single expert-authored geocoding
  procedure; accuracy might vary with different gazetteer sources,
  parameter tuning, or analyst expertise. I treat the baseline as
  representative of standard practice rather than an upper bound on
  professional GIS performance. The single-practitioner results are
  intended as an illustrative comparison point rather than a
  statistically powered estimate of professional accuracy or throughput.
\item
  \textbf{Cost assumptions.} Monetary estimates are tied to the May-2025
  OpenAI pricing schedule; rate changes would alter the cost frontier.
\end{enumerate}

\section{Future Work}\label{future-work}

Building on the present findings, several avenues warrant exploration.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Corpus expansion.} Digitising the remaining volumes of
  \emph{Cavaliers and Pioneers} \citep{Nugent1979_cavaliers3}---and
  analogous land books from Maryland and North Carolina---would permit a
  cross-colonial analysis of settlement diffusion.
\item
  \textbf{Prompt engineering at scale.} A reinforcement-learning loop
  that scores predictions against partial gazetteers could iteratively
  refine prompts or select between tool and non-tool paths.
\item
  \textbf{Polygon recovery.} Combining the model's point estimate with
  chained GIS operations (bearing decoding, river buffering) could
  approximate parcel outlines, unlocking environmental history
  applications.
\item
  \textbf{Human-in-the-loop interfaces.} Lightweight web tools that
  display the model's candidate coordinates alongside archival imagery
  would enable rapid expert validation and correction.
\end{itemize}

\section{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}

This study provides the first systematic benchmark of large language
models on the task of geolocating colonial-era Virginia land grants
directly from narrative abstracts. Across nine model--pipeline
combinations, I find that an off-the-shelf one-shot prompt to the
o3-2025-04-16 model achieves a mean positional error of 23.4
km---matching or outperforming a standard professional GIS workflow
while reducing cost by two orders of magnitude and latency by three.
Contrary to expectations, granting LLMs external geocoding tools does
not automatically improve results.

The implications for digital history are immediate: large corpora of
archival land records can now be mapped at state scale in hours rather
than months, facilitating quantitative studies of settlement, labor, and
landscape change. At the same time, I highlight failure modes that
demand scholarly caution and outline procedural safeguards, including
hybrid verification and periodic re-benchmarking. Taken together, the
results validate LLM-assisted geocoding as a viable, resource-efficient
complement to traditional geospatial research, and chart a path toward
fully spatially-enabled colonial archives.

\section{Acknowledgements}\label{acknowledgements}

This work builds upon the meticulous archival research of Nell Marion
Nugent, whose \emph{Cavaliers and Pioneers} abstracts have preserved
Virginia's colonial land records for generations of scholars. I am
deeply grateful to Bimbola Bashorun \citep{Bashorun2025_gis} for
providing the professional GIS benchmark that was crucial to evaluating
model performance. Special thanks to the Library of Virginia and the
Virginia Surveyor's Office for granting access to their digital archives
and land patent collections, which made the ground-truth dataset
possible.

Finally, I am indebted to the digital humanities community whose ongoing
conversations about LLMs and historical research have informed this
project's methodological approach.

\appendix
\section{Supplementary Methods \& Materials}\label{appendix-a-supplementary-methods-materials}

\subsection{OCR \& Text-Normalisation
Pipeline}\label{a.1-ocr-text-normalisation-pipeline}

The corpus preparation described in ยง3.2 comprised a multi-stage optical
character recognition (OCR) and text normalisation pipeline.
\emph{Cavaliers and Pioneers} Volume 3 was scanned at 600 DPI, yielding
high-resolution page images in PDF format.

I optimized OCR parameters through controlled experiments with Tesseract
engine modes and page segmentation configurations, ultimately selecting
LSTM neural network processing (OEM 3) with fully automatic page
segmentation (PSM 3) based on quantitative text extraction metrics. The
OCR workflow employed OCRmyPDF with page rotation detection, document
deskewing, and custom configurations to preserve period-appropriate
spacing patterns.

Post-OCR text normalisation included: (1) removal of running headers and
pagination artifacts, (2) contextual dehyphenation of line-break-split
words, and (3) structural parsing to isolate individual land grant
abstracts. Quality control involved manual inspection focusing on
toponym preservation, with spot-checking indicating character-level
accuracy exceeding 98\% for toponyms. The processed corpus was then
exported to CSV format for geolocation analysis.

\subsection{Prompts and Model Configurations}\label{sec:prompts}

\paragraph{A.2.1 One-Shot Prompt
(M-series)}\label{a.2.1-one-shot-prompt-m-series}

The M-series models utilized a minimal one-shot prompt designed to
elicit precise coordinate predictions:

\begin{lstlisting}
Geolocate this colonial Virginia land grant to precise latitude and longitude coordinates.
Respond with ONLY the coordinates in this format: [DD]ยฐ[MM]'[SS].[SSSSS]"N [DDD]ยฐ[MM]'[SS].[SSSSS]"W
\end{lstlisting}

\paragraph{A.2.2 Tool-Augmented System Prompt
(T-series)}\label{a.2.2-tool-augmented-system-prompt-t-series}

For tool-augmented models, I employed a structured system prompt that
defined available tools, workflow, and constraints:

\begin{lstlisting}
You are an expert historical geographer specialising in colonial-era Virginia land records.
Your job is to provide precise latitude/longitude coordinates for the land-grant description the user supplies.

Available tools
โข `geocode_place(query, strategy)`
    โ Look up a place name via the Google Geocoding API (Virginia-restricted).
    โ Returns JSON: `{lat, lng, formatted_address, strategy, query_used}`.
โข `compute_centroid(points)`
    โ Accepts **two or more** objects like `{lat: 37.1, lng: -76.7}` and returns their average.

Workflow
0. Craft the most specific initial search string you can (creek, branch, river-mouth, parish, neighbour surname + county + "Virginia").

1. Call `geocode_place` with that string. If the result is in the expected or an adjacent county *and* the feature lies in Virginia (or an NC border county), treat it as **plausible**. A matching feature keyword in `formatted_address` is *preferred* but not mandatory after several attempts.

2. If the first call is not plausible, iteratively refine the query (alternate spelling, nearby landmark, bordering county, etc.) and call `geocode_place` again until you obtain *at least one* plausible point **or** you have made six tool calls, whichever comes first.

3. Optional centroid use โ if the grant text clearly places the tract *between* two or more natural features (e.g., "between the mouth of Cypress Swamp and Blackwater River") **or** you have two distinct plausible anchor points (creek-mouth, swamp, plantation), you may call `compute_centroid(points)` exactly once to average them. Otherwise skip this step.

4. You may make up to **ten** total tool calls. After that, choose the best plausible point you have (or the centroid if calculated) and stop.

5. Final answer โ reply with **only** the coordinates in decimal degrees with six digits after the decimal point, e.g., `36.757059, -77.836728`. No explanatory text.

Important rules
โข Always perform at least one successful `geocode_place` call before any other tool.
โข Invoke `compute_centroid` only when you already have two or more plausible anchor points and averaging will help locate a "between" description.
โข Never invent coordinatesโderive them from tool output.
โข Return no explanatory text, symbols, or degree signsโjust `lat, lon`.
\end{lstlisting}

\paragraph{A.2.3 Model Configurations}\label{a.2.3-model-configurations}

Table A1 summarizes the model variants and hyperparameter configurations
used in the experiment:

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1236}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.3933}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1348}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1461}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2022}}@{}}
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Method ID
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Pipeline
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Temperature
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Reasoning Effort
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
M-1 & o4-mini-2025-04-16 & one\_shot & & medium \\
M-2 & o3-2025-04-16 & one\_shot & & medium \\
M-3 & o3-mini-2025-01-31 & one\_shot & & medium \\
M-4 & gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & one\_shot & 0.2 & \\
M-5 & gpt-4o-2024-08-06 & one\_shot & 0.2 & \\
M-6 & gpt-3.5-turbo & one\_shot & 0.2 & \\
T-1 & o4-mini-2025-04-16 & tool\_chain & & low \\
T-4 & gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & tool\_chain & 0.2 & \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{Example Chain-of-Thought Trace
(T-4)}\label{a.3-example-chain-of-thought-trace-t-4}

Below is a representative example of the tool-augmented chain of thought
from from method T-2 (o3-2025-04-16 with tool access). This trace
demonstrates the model's reasoning process, including query formulation,
tool call selection, and coordinate determination for a colonial
Virginia land grant.

\textbf{Input Abstract:}

\begin{lstlisting}
WILLIAM WILLIAMS, 400 acs., on S. side of the main Black Water Swamp; by run of Holloway Sw; 24 Apr....
\end{lstlisting}

\textbf{Tool-Augmented Reasoning Chain:}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  \textbf{Locating Key Features}

\begin{lstlisting}
Reasoning: I need to parse a land grant description from 1703 mentioning "the S side of the main 
Black Water Swamp" and locate the southwestern side of it. I know Blackwater Swamp is in 
southeastern Virginia, specifically in Prince George County, and flows into the Blackwater River. 
There's a part of it in Surry County too. I'm curious if Holloway Swamp is a small tributary.

Tool: geocode_place
Query: "Holloway Swamp, Sussex County, Virginia"
Result: {
  "lat": 36.9058167, 
  "lng": -77.2405153, 
  "formatted_address": "Sussex County, VA, USA"
}
\end{lstlisting}
\item
  \textbf{Cross-Referencing Features}

\begin{lstlisting}
Reasoning: I've noted the coordinates for Holloway Swamp in Sussex County. Next, I want to confirm 
the location of Blackwater Swamp's larger trunk. The description indicates it's on the south side 
of the main Black Water Swamp, near the meeting point of Holloway Swamp.

Tool: geocode_place
Query: "Blackwater Swamp, Sussex County, Virginia"
Result: {
  "lat": 37.10810973, 
  "lng": -77.15139208, 
  "formatted_address": "Blackwater Swamp, Virginia 23842, USA"
}
\end{lstlisting}
\item
  \textbf{Disambiguating Locations}

\begin{lstlisting}
Reasoning: I'm looking at the coordinates 37.1081, -77.1514, which seem to place me in northeastern 
Sussex County near the Prince George border. I've noted Holloway Swamp's coordinates at 36.9058, 
-77.2405, about 0.2 degrees south and slightly west.

Tool: geocode_place
Query: "Holloway Swamp and Blackwater Swamp confluence, Virginia"
Result: {
  "lat": 37.4315734, 
  "lng": -78.6568942, 
  "formatted_address": "Virginia, USA"
}
\end{lstlisting}
\item
  \textbf{Further Refinement}

\begin{lstlisting}
Tool: geocode_place
Query: "Holloway Branch, Blackwater Swamp, Prince George County, Virginia"
Result: {
  "lat": 37.1733, 
  "lng": -77.2396666, 
  "formatted_address": "Blackwater Dr, Virginia 23842, USA"
}

Reasoning: I found the coordinates 37.1733, -77.2397, which might be along Blackwater Dr, near Waverly. 
But I noticed the coordinates for Holloway Swamp at 36.9058, which is in southwestern Sussex, 
so there's a mismatch. It's possible there could be two features named Holloway Swamp.
\end{lstlisting}
\item
  \textbf{Testing Alternate Spellings}

\begin{lstlisting}
Tool: geocode_place
Query: "Halloway Swamp, Virginia"
Result: {
  "lat": 37.4315734, 
  "lng": -78.6568942, 
  "formatted_address": "Virginia, USA"
}

Tool: geocode_place
Query: "Holloway Swamp, Prince George County, Virginia"
Result: {
  "lat": 37.1593052, 
  "lng": -77.2405153, 
  "formatted_address": "Prince George County, VA, USA"
}
\end{lstlisting}
\item
  \textbf{Calculating Spatial Midpoint}

\begin{lstlisting}
Tool: geocode_place
Query: "Blackwater Swamp, Prince George County, Virginia"
Result: {
  "lat": 37.1733, 
  "lng": -77.2396666, 
  "formatted_address": "Blackwater Dr, Virginia 23842, USA"
}

Reasoning: I'm analyzing the coordinates: lat 37.1593, long -77.2405 and lat 37.1733, long -77.2397.
The latitude difference of about 0.051 equals roughly 5.6 km north, while the longitude difference
is approximately 7.4 km. Since I need the "south side of Blackwater Swamp," I should compute
a centroid that reflects this relationship.

Tool: compute_centroid
Points: [
  {"lat": 37.1733, "lng": -77.2396666}, 
  {"lat": 37.1593052, "lng": -77.2405153}
]
Result: {
  "lat": 37.16630260, 
  "lng": -77.24009098
}
\end{lstlisting}
\end{enumerate}

\textbf{Final Coordinate Output:}
\passthrough{\lstinline!37.166303, -77.240091!}

This trace demonstrates how the tool-chain approach systematically
refines its search, testing multiple geographic hypotheses before
settling on a final coordinate. The model first locates the two key
features (Blackwater and Holloway Swamps), then resolves ambiguities
through both county-specific queries and alternate spellings, finally
computing a centroid between the two most plausible anchor points.

\subsection{Function \& Tool
Specifications}\label{a.4-function-tool-specifications}

Two JSON-Schema tools extend the language model's native reasoning with
external geographic capabilities. The schemas are injected into the
OpenAI \emph{Responses} request via the \passthrough{\lstinline!tools!}
parameter, allowing the model to emit
\passthrough{\lstinline!function\_call!} objects whose arguments are
validated and then executed by the evaluation driver. After execution
the Python backend streams a
\passthrough{\lstinline!function\_call\_output!} item containing the
tool's JSON result, which the model can read on the next turn---in a
repeated action-observation loop.

\begin{lstlisting}
// geocode_place โ wrapper around Google Geocoding API (Virginia-restricted)
{
  "type": "function",
  "name": "geocode_place",
  "description": "Resolve a place description to coordinates.",
  "parameters": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "query": {
        "type": "string",
        "description": "Free-form geocoding query, e.g. 'Blackwater River, Isle of Wight County'."
      },
      "strategy": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": [
          "natural_feature", "restricted_va", "standard_va", "county_fallback"
        ],
        "description": "Search heuristic controlling how the backend constructs variant queries."
      }
    },
    "required": ["query"]
  }
}
\end{lstlisting}

The driver maps the call to
\passthrough{\lstinline!\_google\_geocode()!} with a hard-coded
\passthrough{\lstinline!components=administrative\_area:VA!} filter,
discards results falling outside Virginia, and returns a trimmed JSON
object
\passthrough{\lstinline!\{lat, lng, formatted\_address, strategy, query\_used\}!}.
A single tool therefore exposes the entire Google Places knowledge graph
while keeping the model sandboxed from the broader web.

\begin{lstlisting}
// compute_centroid โ spherical mean of โฅ2 anchor points
{
  "type": "function",
  "name": "compute_centroid",
  "description": "Return the centroid (average lat/lng) of two or more coordinate points.",
  "parameters": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "points": {
        "type": "array",
        "minItems": 2,
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "lat": {"type": "number"},
            "lng": {"type": "number"}
          },
          "required": ["lat", "lng"]
        }
      }
    },
    "required": ["points"]
  }
}
\end{lstlisting}

The backend converts each \passthrough{\lstinline!(lat, lng)!} pair to a
unit-sphere Cartesian vector, averages the components, and projects the
mean vector back to geographic coordinates---an approach that avoids
meridian-wrap artefacts and preserves accuracy for points separated by
\textgreater100 km.

\paragraph{Interaction Pattern}\label{interaction-pattern}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  \emph{Planning.} The assistant reasons in natural language and decides
  whether a geocoder query is necessary.
\item
  \emph{Invocation.} It emits a \passthrough{\lstinline!function\_call!}
  with the chosen arguments. The evaluation script records the call for
  later provenance analysis.
\item
  \emph{Execution \& Observation.} The Python backend executes the call,
  returning a JSON payload as a
  \passthrough{\lstinline!function\_call\_output!} message appended to
  the conversation.
\item
  \emph{Reflection.} Reading the payload, the model either (i) issues a
  refined query, (ii) averages multiple anchors via
  \passthrough{\lstinline!compute\_centroid!}, or (iii) produces a final
  coordinate string.
\end{enumerate}

This structured loop allows the model to chain up to ten tool calls and
records every intermediate query, result, and internal rationale.

\subsection{Evaluation Driver \& Code
Repository}\label{a.5-evaluation-driver-code-repository}

All experiments are orchestrated by a single Python script,
\passthrough{\lstinline!run\_experiment.py!}, which exposes a
reproducible command-line interface (CLI) for selecting the evaluation
set, method roster, and runtime flags (e.g.,
\passthrough{\lstinline!--dry-run!},
\passthrough{\lstinline!--max-rows!}). The driver

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  loads method and prompt definitions from YAML,
\item
  initialises the OpenAI client with deterministic seeds,
\item
  executes each model--abstract pair in sequence, proxying any
  \passthrough{\lstinline!function\_call!} requests to the tool back-end
  described above,
\item
  logs raw API traffic---including intermediate tool traces---to
  \passthrough{\lstinline!runs/<method>/calls.jsonl!}, and
\item
  emits both row-level results
  (\passthrough{\lstinline!results\_<evalset>.csv!}) and a Markdown run
  report summarising accuracy, cost, and latency.
\end{itemize}

This tight integration between evaluation logic and provenance logging
ensures that every coordinate prediction in the paper can be reproduced
from first principles using the open-source code. A public repository
containing the driver, prompts, ground-truth data, and analysis
notebooks is available at
\url{https://github.com/ryanmio/colonial-virginia-llm-geolocation}.

\section{Extended Results}\label{appendix-b-extended-results}

\subsection{Detailed Accuracy Metrics}\label{b.1-detailed-accuracy-metrics}

Table \ref{tbl:error_ci} provides comprehensive error statistics for
each evaluated method, including confidence intervals derived from
bootstrap resampling (10,000 iterations). The best-performing automated
approach, M-2 (o3-2025-04-16), achieves a mean error of 23.39 km with a
95\% confidence interval of {[}17.57, 29.54{]} km.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lllll@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:error_ci}Mean error with 95\% confidence intervals
for each method.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
Method & Model & n & Mean km & 95\% CI \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
Method & Model & n & Mean km & 95\% CI \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
H-1 & Professional GIS script & 21 & 75.08 & {[}56.80, 93.84{]} \\
M-1 & o4-mini-2025-04-16 & 43 & 41.65 & {[}33.65, 50.04{]} \\
M-2 & o3-2025-04-16 & 43 & 23.39 & {[}17.57, 29.54{]} \\
M-3 & o3-mini-2025-01-31 & 43 & 50.25 & {[}43.22, 57.86{]} \\
M-4 & gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & 43 & 28.51 & {[}22.33, 34.79{]} \\
M-5 & gpt-4o-2024-08-06 & 43 & 27.93 & {[}22.37, 34.23{]} \\
M-6 & gpt-3.5-turbo & 43 & 43.05 & {[}33.57, 54.72{]} \\
T-1 & o4-mini-2025-04-16 + tools & 43 & 37.65 & {[}30.61, 45.32{]} \\
T-4 & gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 + tools & 43 & 37.23 & {[}30.34, 44.24{]} \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{Performance by Method}\label{b.2-performance-by-method}

Table \ref{tbl:method_performance} provides the complete performance
statistics for each method, including variance measures and accuracy
bands. The ``โคX km'' columns show the percentage of predictions within X
kilometers of ground truth.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0833}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:method_performance}Detailed performance metrics by
method.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Method
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
n
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
median
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
min
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q1
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q3
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
max
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค25 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค50 km
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Method
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
n
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
median
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
min
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q1
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q3
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
max
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค25 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค50 km
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
H-1 & 21 & 75.08 & 70.70 & 43.30 & 5.98 & 36.87 & 118.36 & 139.59 &
4.8\% & 9.5\% & 42.9\% \\
M-1 & 43 & 41.65 & 27.39 & 27.32 & 7.59 & 18.45 & 70.04 & 103.49 & 7.0\%
& 37.2\% & 62.8\% \\
M-2 & 43 & 23.39 & 14.27 & 19.86 & 2.67 & 8.17 & 36.85 & 87.35 & 30.2\%
& 60.5\% & 93.0\% \\
M-3 & 43 & 50.25 & 48.40 & 24.93 & 6.29 & 27.36 & 69.53 & 123.04 & 4.7\%
& 16.3\% & 53.5\% \\
M-4 & 43 & 28.51 & 25.42 & 20.77 & 2.14 & 12.09 & 40.49 & 98.72 & 20.9\%
& 48.8\% & 86.0\% \\
M-5 & 43 & 27.93 & 24.97 & 19.46 & 3.03 & 14.66 & 37.25 & 98.86 & 16.3\%
& 51.2\% & 90.7\% \\
M-6 & 43 & 43.05 & 34.02 & 36.07 & 5.17 & 17.11 & 49.74 & 176.33 & 4.7\%
& 34.9\% & 76.7\% \\
T-1 & 43 & 37.65 & 33.61 & 24.54 & 0.59 & 18.57 & 62.30 & 110.19 &
14.0\% & 32.6\% & 69.8\% \\
T-4 & 43 & 37.23 & 34.22 & 23.94 & 0.59 & 21.78 & 53.35 & 101.85 &
16.3\% & 32.6\% & 74.4\% \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{Cost-Accuracy Trade-off}\label{b.3-cost-accuracy-trade-off}

Table \ref{tbl:cost_accuracy} examines the cost-accuracy relationship,
emphasizing the economic efficiency of GPT-4o, which achieves near-top
performance at just \$1.05 per 1,000 grants processed. ``Cost per +1\%
โค10 km hit'' indicates the marginal cost of improving high-precision
prediction rate by one percentage point.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.4000}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1500}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:cost_accuracy}Cost-accuracy trade-off by model
family.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean error km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km hit-rate
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Cost per 1k located (USD)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Cost per +1\% โค10 km hit (USD)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean error km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km hit-rate
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Cost per 1k located (USD)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Cost per +1\% โค10 km hit (USD)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
o3-2025-04-16 & 23.39 & 30.2\% & \$127.46 & \$4.22 \\
gpt-4o-2024-08-06 & 27.93 & 16.3\% & \$1.05 & \$0.06 \\
gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & 32.87 & 18.6\% & \$3.49 & \$0.19 \\
o4-mini-2025-04-16 & 39.65 & 10.5\% & \$10.69 & \$1.02 \\
gpt-3.5-turbo & 43.05 & 4.7\% & \$0.10 & \$0.02 \\
o3-mini-2025-01-31 & 50.25 & 4.7\% & \$14.15 & \$3.04 \\
human-gis & 71.40 & 4.7\% & \$3,255.81 & \$700.00 \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{Processing Time Analysis}\label{b.4-processing-time-analysis}

Table \ref{tbl:time_usage} quantifies the latency advantage of automated
methods over traditional GIS workflows. ``Speedup'' shows relative
improvement over the traditional GIS baseline.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 6\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 6\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 6\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2500}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 6\tabcolsep) * \real{0.2500}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:time_usage}Processing time by model.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Hours per located
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Hours per 1k located
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Speedup vs.~baseline
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Hours per located
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Hours per 1k located
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Speedup vs.~baseline
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
gpt-4o-2024-08-06 & 0.0002 & 0.184 & 1,152ร \\
gpt-3.5-turbo & 0.0002 & 0.232 & 914ร \\
gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & 0.0009 & 0.915 & 232ร \\
o3-2025-04-16 & 0.0133 & 13.294 & 16ร \\
o3-mini-2025-01-31 & 0.0088 & 8.791 & 24ร \\
o4-mini-2025-04-16 & 0.0067 & 6.698 & 32ร \\
human-gis & 0.2120 & 212.045 & 1ร \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{Token Usage Statistics}\label{b.5-token-usage-statistics}

Table \ref{tbl:token_usage} provides detailed token consumption data
across all models, offering insight into computational efficiency.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}llll@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:token_usage}Token consumption by model across all
test runs.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
Model & Input tokens & Output tokens & Tokens per 1k located \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
Model & Input tokens & Output tokens & Tokens per 1k located \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
gpt-4o-2024-08-06 & 6,698 & 900 & 176,698 \\
gpt-3.5-turbo & 6,773 & 820 & 176,581 \\
gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & 142,258 & 4,193 & 1,702,919 \\
o3-2025-04-16 & 6,653 & 146,085 & 6,923,209 \\
o3-mini-2025-01-31 & 6,653 & 142,020 & 6,739,372 \\
o4-mini-2025-04-16 & 274,903 & 146,590 & 6,340,337 \\
\end{longtable}

Tool-augmented methods consumed on average 1.49ร more tokens than
pure-prompt counterparts (4,985,953 vs.~3,355,078 tokens per 1,000
located grants). However, this effect varied dramatically by model
architecture: adding tools to GPT-4.1 increased token usage by 18.3ร
(176,698 โ 3,229,140), while o4-mini showed only a 1.14ร increase
(5,937,907 โ 6,742,767).

\subsection{Professional GIS Benchmark
Analysis}\label{b.6-professional-gis-benchmark-analysis}

Table \ref{tbl:human_benchmark} provides a more detailed analysis of the
professional GIS benchmark (H-1) \citep{Bashorun2025_gis} results,
categorized by precision level. This breakdown reveals that even with
expert domain knowledge and access to specialized historical gazetteers,
more than 41.9\% of the human-geocoded grants were located at only
state-level precision. ``High'' indicates grants where both county
boundaries and specific landmarks were used; ``Medium'' indicates
county-centroid placement; ``Low'' indicates state-level precision only.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.3684}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 8\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1579}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:human_benchmark}Professional GIS benchmark results
by accuracy category.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Accuracy Category
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
N
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Share (\%)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean Error (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median Error (km)
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Accuracy Category
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
N
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Share (\%)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean Error (km)
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Median Error (km)
\endend{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
Overall & 43 & 100.0 & 71.40 & 60.20 \\
High (County + Landmarks) & 19 & 44.2 & 68.88 & 48.09 \\
Medium (County centroid) & 6 & 14.0 & 87.95 & 82.11 \\
Low (State-level) & 18 & 41.9 & 68.55 & 63.26 \\
\end{longtable}

Notably, even the ``High'' precision category (where both county
boundaries and specific landmarks were identified) still resulted in a
mean error of 68.88 km---substantially higher than all the automated
methods except GPT-3.5-turbo (M-6). This underscores the inherent
difficulty of the task and further highlights the significance of the
accuracy improvements achieved by the LLM approaches.

\section{Supplementary Figures}\label{appendix-c-supplementary-figures}

\subsection{Error Distribution Plots}\label{c.1-error-distribution-plots}

Figure \ref{fig:error_boxplot} shows the distribution of geolocation
error for each method as a boxplot, complementing the violin plot and
CDF already presented in the main text. The boxplot highlights the
median error (central line), interquartile range (box), and outliers
(points) for each method, providing a clear view of error distribution
and central tendency.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/error_boxplot.pdf}
\caption{Error Distribution Boxplot by Method}\label{fig:error_boxplot}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Error Maps}\label{c.2-error-maps}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/contact_sheet.png}
\caption{Grid view of all 43 mapped grants showing ground truth and all
predictions.}\label{fig:contactsheet}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:contactsheet} plots all six methods for every locatable
grant against ground truth coordinates (black stars). Error distances
are shown as dashed lines connecting predictions to ground truth.

\subsection{Cost-Accuracy Tradeoff}\label{c.3-cost-accuracy-tradeoff}

Figure \ref{fig:pareto_cost_appendix} presents the cost-accuracy Pareto
frontier across all evaluated methods. This visualization expands upon
Figure \ref{fig:pareto_cost} from the main text, providing additional
detail on the trade-offs between monetary expenditure and geolocation
accuracy.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/pareto_tradeoff.pdf}
\caption{Cost-Accuracy Pareto Frontier}\label{fig:pareto_cost_appendix}
\end{figure}

The plot illustrates how automated methods establish a clear Pareto
frontier along the bottom edge, with cost (x-axis, log scale) ranging
over several orders of magnitude while mean error (y-axis) varies
between \textasciitilde23-75 km. The professional GIS baseline appears
in the upper-right quadrant, reflecting its combination of high cost and
relatively high error. GPT-4o offers the most favorable cost-to-accuracy
ratio despite not achieving the absolute lowest error, while
o3-2025-04-16 delivers the best accuracy at significantly higher cost.

\subsection{Latency-Accuracy Tradeoff}\label{c.4-latency-accuracy-tradeoff}

Processing time presents another critical dimension for evaluation. The
figure below shows how each method balances computational latency
against geolocation accuracy. LLM methods cluster in the bottom-left
quadrant, delivering results in seconds rather than minutes, while
maintaining lower error rates than the professional GIS approach.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.8\textheight,keepaspectratio]{figures/pareto_latency_tradeoff.pdf}
\caption{Latency-Accuracy Tradeoff}\label{fig:pareto_latency}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:pareto_latency}: Latency-Accuracy Tradeoff. This figure
plots mean error (km) against processing time per grant (seconds) for
each evaluated method. All automatic methods produce coordinates in
0.2--13 s of computation time, compared to the GIS analyst's labor time
of โ432 s per grant. Note the logarithmic scale on the x-axis.

\section{Tool Augmentation Analysis}\label{appendix-d-tool-augmentation-analysis}

Table \ref{tbl:tool_direct_comparison} isolates the impact of providing
tool access to identical models, revealing that tool augmentation does
not consistently improve accuracy. For GPT-4.1, enabling tool access
increases mean error by 30.6\%, while for the o4-mini model, it
decreases error by 9.6\%.

\subsection{Direct Tool vs.~Non-Tool
Comparison}\label{d.1-direct-tool-vs.-non-tool-comparison}

Table \ref{tbl:tool_direct_comparison} provides a head-to-head
comparison of identical models with and without tool access. This
controls for model architecture effects and isolates the impact of tool
access alone.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1463}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1220}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 22\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0732}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:tool_direct_comparison}Side-by-side comparison of
identical models with and without tool access.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Category
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
median
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
min
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
max
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค1 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค5 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค25 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค50 km
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Category
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
median
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
min
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
max
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค1 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค5 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค25 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค50 km
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & one shot & 28.51 & 25.42 & 20.77 & 2.14 & 98.72 &
0.0\% & 4.7\% & 20.9\% & 48.8\% & 86.0\% \\
gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & tool chain & 37.23 & 34.22 & 23.94 & 0.59 & 101.85
& 2.3\% & 14.0\% & 16.3\% & 32.6\% & 74.4\% \\
o4-mini-2025-04-16 & one shot & 41.65 & 27.39 & 27.32 & 7.59 & 103.49 &
0.0\% & 0.0\% & 7.0\% & 37.2\% & 62.8\% \\
o4-mini-2025-04-16 & tool chain & 37.65 & 33.61 & 24.54 & 0.59 & 110.19
& 4.7\% & 11.6\% & 14.0\% & 32.6\% & 69.8\% \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{Quantified Tool
Effect}\label{d.2-quantified-tool-effect}

Table \ref{tbl:tool_effect} quantifies the precise impact of tool
access, showing percentage changes in mean error and percentage point
(pp) changes in accuracy bands. ``ฮ Mean \%'' shows percent change in
mean error; ``pp'' indicates percentage point differences in accuracy
bands. Negative percentages for mean change indicate worse performance
with tools.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1429}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 16\tabcolsep) * \real{0.1071}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:tool_effect}Quantified effect of tool
augmentation.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean M
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean T
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ Mean \%
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค1 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค5 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค10 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค25 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค50 km pp
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Model
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean M
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Mean T
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ Mean \%
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค1 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค5 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค10 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค25 km pp
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
ฮ โค50 km pp
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 & 28.51 & 37.23 & -30.6\% & +2.3 pp & +9.3 pp & -4.7
pp & -16.3 pp & -11.6 pp \\
o4-mini-2025-04-16 & 41.65 & 37.65 & 9.6\% & +4.7 pp & +11.6 pp & +7.0
pp & -4.7 pp & +7.0 pp \\
\end{longtable}

While the o4-mini model showed a modest improvement with tools, the
higher-quality GPT-4.1 model performed substantially worse when given
tool access.

\subsection{Top-performing methods per tool-use
category}\label{d.3-top-performing-methods-per-tool-use-category}

Table \ref{tbl:best_methods} shows a direct head-to-head comparison of
the best-performing tool-use method vs the best non-tool method. M-2
(o3-2025-04-16, one-shot prompt) substantially outperforms the best
tool-augmented method (T-4), achieving a 37\% lower mean error and
nearly double the proportion of predictions within 10 km.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}
  >{\raggedright\arraybackslash}p{(\linewidth - 20\tabcolsep) * \real{0.0909}}@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:best_methods}Best-performing methods per
category.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Method
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
median
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
min
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q1
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q3
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
max
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค25 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค50 km
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
\begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Method
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
mean
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
median
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
sd
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
min
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q1
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
Q3
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
max
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค10 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค25 km
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{\linewidth}\raggedright
โค50 km
\end{minipage} \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
M (M-2) & 23.39 & 14.27 & 19.86 & 2.67 & 8.17 & 36.85 & 87.35 & 30.2\% &
60.5\% & 93.0\% \\
T (T-4) & 37.23 & 34.22 & 23.94 & 0.59 & 21.78 & 53.35 & 101.85 & 16.3\%
& 32.6\% & 74.4\% \\
\end{longtable}

At the category level, the best non-tool method (M-2) significantly
outperformed the best tool-augmented method (T-4) across all error
metrics.

\subsection{Tool Call
Distribution}\label{d.4-tool-call-distribution}

Table \ref{tbl:tool_distribution} expands on the tool usage patterns
discussed in Section 6.6, providing detailed statistics on how each
model interacted with the available geocoding and centroid-computation
tools.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lllllll@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:tool_distribution}Distribution of tool calls by
method and tool type.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
Method & Tool Type & Mean & SD & Median & Min & Max \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
Method & Tool Type & Mean & SD & Median & Min & Max \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
T-1 (o4-mini) & geocode\_place & 3.79 & 2.41 & 3 & 1 & 10 \\
T-1 (o4-mini) & compute\_centroid & 0.16 & 0.37 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
T-4 (gpt-4.1) & geocode\_place & 2.05 & 1.78 & 1 & 1 & 7 \\
T-4 (gpt-4.1) & compute\_centroid & 0.25 & 0.43 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
\end{longtable}

\subsection{ToolSearch
Efficiency}\label{d.5-toolsearch-efficiency}

``Selected call index'' indicates which API call in the sequence
produced the coordinates used in the final answer. Lower values indicate
more efficient search strategies.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}llll@{}}
\caption{\label{tbl:search_efficiency}Tool search efficiency
metrics.}\tabularnewline
\toprule\noalign{}
Method & Mean selected call index & Median & First-call success rate \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endfirsthead
\toprule\noalign{}
Method & Mean selected call index & Median & First-call success rate \\
\midrule\noalign{}
\endhead
\bottomrule\noalign{}
\endlastfoot
T-1 (o4-mini) & 2.29 & 1 & 69.0\% \\
T-4 (gpt-4.1) & 1.95 & 1 & 72.7\% \\
\end{longtable}

The more economical approach of GPT-4.1 is evident in both the
distribution of calls and search efficiency. While T-1 (o4-mini) made
nearly twice as many geocoding calls on average (3.79 vs.~2.05), it
achieved a slightly lower first-call success rate (69.0\% vs.~72.7\%).
This pattern aligns with the overall finding that tool augmentation does
not consistently improve accuracy; in fact, the additional API calls may
introduce noise through spurious matches to modern place names that bear
little relation to colonial-era settlements.

Overall, both models heavily favored direct geocoding over centroid
computation, with geocode:centroid ratios of 23.29:1 for T-1 and 8.18:1
for T-4. This suggests that the models primarily relied on finding exact
matches for place names mentioned in the abstracts rather than
triangulating from multiple reference points---a strategy that may
explain their susceptibility to modern naming coincidences.
